The **Fleischer _Superman_ cartoons** are a series of seventeen animated short
films released in Technicolor by Paramount Pictures and based upon the comic
book character Superman, making them his first animated appearance.

They were originally produced by Fleischer Studios, who completed the initial
short and eight further cartoons in 1941 and 1942. Production was assumed in
May 1942 by Famous Studios, a successor company to Fleischer, who produced
eight more cartoons in 1942 and 1943. _Superman_ was the final animated series
initiated by Fleischer Studios, before Famous Studios officially took over
production.[1]

Although all entries are in the public domain,[2] ancillary rights such as
merchandising contract rights, as well as the original 35mm master elements,
are owned today by Warner Bros. Entertainment. Warner has owned _Superman_
publisher DC Comics since 1967.

Only the first nine cartoons were produced by Fleischer Studios; nonetheless,
all 17 episodes are collectively known as "the Fleischer Superman cartoons".
In 1942, Fleischer Studios was dissolved and reorganized as Famous Studios,
which produced the final eight shorts. These cartoons are seen as some of the
finest quality (and certainly, the most lavishly budgeted) animated cartoons
produced during The Golden Age of American animation. In 1994, the first entry
in the series was voted #33 of The 50 Greatest Cartoons of all time by members
of the animation field.

By mid-1941, brothers Max and Dave Fleischer were running their own animation
studio in Miami, Florida, and had recently finished their first animated
feature film, _Gulliver's Travels_. The Fleischers were also well into
production on their second, _Mr. Bug Goes to Town._ Not wanting to risk
becoming overworked (which could compromise the quality of each project), the
Fleischers were strongly (but quietly) opposed to the idea of committing
themselves to another major project when they were approached by their
studio's distributor and majority owner since May 1941, Paramount Pictures.
Paramount was interested in financially exploiting the phenomenal popularity
of the then-new _Superman_ comic books, by producing a series of theatrical
cartoons based upon the character. The Fleischers, looking for a way to reject
the project without _appearing_ uncooperative, agreed to do the series—but
only at a (intentionally inflated) per-episode-budget number so exorbitantly
high that Paramount would have to reject _them_ , instead. They told Paramount
that producing such a conceptually and technically complex series of cartoons
would cost about $100,000 per short (in 1940s dollars, or $1,700,000 per short
as of 2017); this was about four times the typical budget of a six-minute
episode of the Fleischers' popular _Popeye the Sailor_ cartoons of that
period.[3] To the Fleischers' shock, instead of withdrawing its request,
Paramount entered into negotiations with them, and got the per-episode budget
lowered to $50,000.[4] Now the Fleischers were committed to a project they
never wanted to do—with more financial and marketing support than they had
ever received for the projects they had done.

The first cartoon in the series, simply titled _Superman_ (a.k.a. _The Mad
Scientist_ ), was released on September 26, 1941, and was nominated for the
1941 Academy Award for Best Short Subject: Cartoons. It lost to _Lend a Paw_ ,
a Pluto cartoon from Walt Disney Productions and RKO Pictures.

The voice of Superman for the series was initially provided by Bud Collyer,
who also performed the lead character's voice during _The Adventures of
Superman_ radio series. Joan Alexander was the voice of Lois Lane, a role she
also portrayed on radio alongside Collyer. Music for the series was composed
by Sammy Timberg, the Fleischers' long-time musical collaborator.

Rotoscoping, the process of tracing animation drawings from live-action
footage, was used minimally to lend realism to the character's bodily
movements.[3] Many of Superman's actions, however, could not be rotoscoped
(such as flying, lifting very large objects, etc.). In these cases, the
Fleischers' lead animators—many of whom lacked training in figure
drawing—animated "roughly" and depended upon their assistants (many of whom
were inexperienced animators, but trained figure-drawers) to keep Superman "on
model" during his action sequences.[3]

The Fleischer cartoons were also responsible for giving Superman perhaps his
most singular superpower: flight. When the Fleischers started work on the
series, in the comic books, Superman could only _leap_ from place to place
(hence the classic phrase, "able to leap tall buildings in a single bound").
After seeing the leaping fully animated, however, the Fleischers deemed it
"silly looking", and asked permission from Action Comics (later DC Comics) to
have him fly instead; the publisher agreed, and Superman was formally given
the power of flight thereafter. Previously, he was only shown flying in the
comics due to an artist and editorial error in Superman #10.[5]

By the end of 1941, the brothers were no longer able to cooperate with each
other, and the studio's co-owner Dave Fleischer had left Florida for
California, where he would eventually become the new head of Columbia
Pictures' Screen Gems studio.[6] After the Fleischers were removed from the
company, Paramount renamed the organization Famous Studios, placing Seymour
Kneitel, Isadore Sparber, Sam Buchwald, and Dan Gordon in charge of
production. The sleek look of the series continued, but there was a noticeable
change in the storylines of the later shorts of the series after Famous
replaced Fleischer as producer. The first nine cartoons had more of a science
fiction aspect to them, as they involved the Man of Steel fighting robots,
giant dinosaurs, meteors from outer space, and other perils. The later eight
cartoons in the series, which were all Famous Studios productions, dealt more
with World War II propaganda stories, such as in _Eleventh Hour_ , which finds
Superman going to Japan to commit acts of sabotage in order to reduce the
morale of the enemy; meanwhile, an angered Adolf Hitler had a cameo role at
the end of _Jungle Drums_ after Superman foiled another Nazi plot.

The first seven cartoons originated the classic opening line which was later
adopted by the _Superman_ radio series and in the live-action television
series a decade later: "Faster than a speeding bullet! More powerful than a
locomotive! Able to leap tall buildings in a single bound!" (The radio series
also eventually used the cartoon series' theme music.) However, for the final
two Fleischer-produced cartoons and the first of the eight Famous Studios-
produced cartoons, the opening was changed to "Faster than a speeding bullet!
More powerful than a locomotive! Able to soar higher than any plane!". For the
remaining Famous Studios-produced cartoons, the opening line was changed again
to "Faster than a streak of lightning! More powerful than the pounding surf!
Mightier than a roaring hurricane!" For international prints of Superman
cartoons starting with "Eleventh Hour" the opening line is "Faster than a
streak of lightning! More powerful than the pounding surf! Mightier than a
roaring hurricane!" This series also featured a slight variation of the now-
classic exclamation (also from the radio series): "Up in the sky, look! It's a
bird! It's a plane! It's Superman!".

Famous Studios ended the series after a total of seventeen shorts had been
produced, replacing it with a series of shorts based upon Marge's _Little
Lulu_. The high cost of the series kept it from continuing in the face of
budgetary restrictions that were imposed after removing the Fleischers from
the studio. The first cartoon had a budget of $50,000 (equivalent to
$850,365.62 in 2016), and the other sixteen each had a budget of $30,000
(equivalent to $510,219.37 for each of the eight other Fleischer cartoons and
$485,414.68 for each of the eight Famous Studios cartoons), bringing the total
cost of the series to $530,000 (equivalent to $8,815,438.02 in 2016).[4] In
addition, Paramount cited waning interest in the _Superman_ shorts among
theater exhibitors as another justification for the series'
cancellation.[7][8]

The rights to all seventeen cartoons eventually reverted to National Comics,
who licensed TV syndication rights to Flamingo Films (distributors of the TV
series _Adventures of Superman_ ). All eventually fell into the public domain,
due to National failing to renew their copyrights; thus, they have been widely
distributed on VHS, LaserDisc, and DVD.[2] Nonetheless, Warner Bros., via
parent WarnerMedia's ownership of DC Comics, now owns the original film
elements to the cartoons.

A 1944 Famous Studios _Popeye the Sailor_ cartoon entitled _She-Sick Sailors_
parodied the Superman cartoons a year after production of the cartoons had
ceased. In this cartoon, Popeye's enemy Bluto, who was voiced by the announcer
for the Superman radio series, Jackson Beck, dresses up as Superman to fool
Olive Oyl, and he challenges Popeye to feats of super-strength that "only
Superman" can do. The musical score for _She-Sick Sailors_ includes echoes of
Sammy Timberg's Fleischer/Famous _Superman_ score.

The previous year, _Merrie Melodies_ did a parody starring Bugs Bunny called
_Super-Rabbit_.

In a rare move for a competing studio, Leon Schlesinger Productions, producers
of _Looney Tunes_ and _Merrie Melodies_ (which were distributed by WB),
featured Timberg's Superman theme in _Snafuperman_ , a 1944 Private Snafu
cartoon Schlesinger produced for the U.S. Army.

Paramount's involvement in the _Superman_ franchise did not end with the sale
of the cartoons. In 1995, after being sold to Viacom, Paramount's television
syndication unit absorbed Viacom Enterprises, and as a result, Paramount now
held the TV rights to the third and fourth _Superman_ films, along with the
_Supergirl_ film (which up to that point had been held by Viacom). Full rights
to _Superman III_ and _Supergirl_ are now with WB, but Paramount still has
some partial rights to _Superman IV_ (as part of the Cannon Films library),
and TV distribution is now held (on Paramount's behalf) by Trifecta
Entertainment & Media.

In 1985, DC Comics named Fleischer Studios as one of the honorees in the
company's 50th anniversary publication _Fifty Who Made DC Great_ for its work
on the Superman cartoons.[9] Writer/artist Frank Miller cited the influence of
Max and Dave Fleischer, including them among a list of prominent Golden Age
comics creators whose work he acknowledged at the end of his 1986 comics
series, _Batman: The Dark Knight Returns_.[ _citation needed_ ] The series
strongly influenced the creation of the acclaimed animated television series
_Batman: The Animated Series_ , as well as the similar-looking _Superman: The
Animated Series_.[ _citation needed_ ] Comic book artist Alex Ross has also
listed the shorts among the inspiration for his take on Superman's look.[
_citation needed_ ]

This animated version of Superman was planned to be made as a cameo in the
deleted scene "Acme's Funeral" from the 1988 film _Who Framed Roger Rabbit_.
[1]

The robot robbery scene from _The Mechanical Monsters_ short has been echoed
by several later works. In 1980, Japanese animation director Hayao Miyazaki
created an identical robbery with a similarly functioning robot in the last
episode of the second _Lupin III_ TV series, a robot design he used again in
his feature film, _Castle in the Sky_.[10] The elements of the scene were
borrowed again in 1994 for "The Tick vs. Brainchild" (Season 1, Episode 9 of
_The Tick_ ), with the robbery committed by Skippy, a cyborg dog.[11] The 2004
feature-length movie _Sky Captain and the World of Tomorrow_ (which Paramount
released in several territories, WB also distributed in a few countries) kept
the setting in the 1940s, but scaled up the scene from a single robot robbing
a jewelry exhibition to an army of gigantic robots stealing city
infrastructure. The movie gave a nod to its source following the robbery with
the newspaper headline, "Mechanical Monsters Unearth Generators."

_The Mechanical Monsters_ itself was featured as part of _Fantastic Animation
Festival_.

A 1988 music video for the song "Spy In The House of Love" by Chrysalis
Records recording artists Was (Not Was) borrowed footage extensively from
Famous' _Secret Agent_ short.[ _citation needed_ ]

The Paramount _Superman_ cartoons are widely available on VHS, DVD and online.

The first "official" home video releases of the series were by Warner Home
Video in 1987 and 1988, in a series of VHS and LaserDisc packages called _TV's
Best Adventures of Superman_. Four volumes were released, where each volume
contained 2 selected episodes of the classic 1950s TV series _Adventures of
Superman_ (one black & white episode and one color episode), plus a selected
Max Fleischer _Superman_ short (marking the first "official" release of such
as Warner holds the original film elements).

Among the best reviewed of these various releases was a 1991 VHS set produced
by Bosko Video, the somewhat incorrectly titled _The Complete Superman
Collection: Golden Anniversary Edition - The Paramount Cartoon Classics of Max
& Dave Fleischer_ released as two VHS volumes which featured high-quality
transfers from 35mm prints. The Bosko Video set was later issued on DVD by
Image Entertainment as _The Complete Superman Collection: Diamond Anniversary
Edition_ in 2000. The Bosko Video release was not associated with DC Comics or
their parent company Warner Bros.

Another DVD was _Superman: The Ultimate Max Fleischer Cartoon Collection_ from
VCI Entertainment released on May 30, 2006, a month prior to the release of
the film _Superman Returns_. DVD features included: all 17 animated shorts
digitally restored in Dolby Digital 2.0 audio; a bonus cartoon: _Snafuperman_
(a 1944 Warner Bros. wartime parody of the Fleischer cartoons, featuring
Private Snafu and produced for the U.S. Army); "Behind the Cape" synopses and
fun facts with each cartoon; a DVD fold-out booklet with notes on the series;
bios of the voice actors, producer Max Fleischer, and Superman; a bonus
trailer for the 1948 _Superman_ serial with Kirk Alyn; and a recorded audio
phone interview with Joan Alexander (the voice of Lois Lane). This release,
like the Bosko Video release, was not associated with DC Comics or their
parent company Warner Bros.

A more "official" release from restored and remastered, superior original
vault elements was released on DVD on November 28, 2006 as part of Warner Home
Video's Superman film re-releases. The first nine cartoons were released as
part of the four-disc special edition _Superman: The Movie_ set, and the eight
remaining cartoons were included on the two-disc special edition _Superman II_
set. The entire collected Fleischer / Famous cartoons were included in the box
sets _The Christopher Reeve Superman Collection_ and _Superman Ultimate
Collector's Edition_ , where both sets also included a 13-minute short
documentary on the history of these cartoons, entitled _First Flight: The
Fleischer Superman Series_. This documentary (which was included on the
_Superman II_ two-disc special edition DVD) features interviews with surviving
members, relatives and biographers of the animation and production team, also
contemporary animators such as Bruce Timm ( _Batman: The Animated Series_ ),
Paul Dini and Dan Riba ( _Superman: The Animated Series_ ) who detail the
influence these cartoons have had on their own works. Upon this release
though, there was controversy by some consumers over why Warner's chose to
release these animated shorts amongst the _Superman_ films DVD releases
instead of packaging them as their own complete individual DVD release.

In 2004, a two-disc set was released by Platinum disc corporation with
digitally enhanced audio 5.1.

In December 2004, Toonami Digital Arsenal made the shorts available for free
download in mp4 format on its website. They posted one episode per day with
the final episode, "Secret Agent", going live on New Year's Day 2005.

Another came on July 1, 2008, when Warner Bros. released the shorts on iTunes,
via their DC Comics sections. Fourteen of the shorts are available for $1.99
for every two, while the other three are all in one video for the same price.

On April 7, 2009, yet another release was made, this time a collection of all
the cartoons released by Warner Home Video as the first authorized collection
from the original masters, titled _Max Fleischer's Superman: 1941-1942_ with a
suggested price at $26.99; the set included one new special feature in the
form of " _The Man, The Myth, Superman_ " featurette, along with an old
special feature seen in the _Superman II_ 2006 DVD release entitled " _First
Flight: The Fleischer Superman Series_ ".[12]

The 8-disc Blu-ray boxset _The Superman Motion Picture Anthology_ , released
in June 2011, includes all the Max Fleischer cartoons in SD as bonuses on the
discs for the two versions of _Superman II_.[13] The nine Fleischer Studios
cartoons plus the 13-minutes feature _First Flight: The Fleischer Superman
Series_ are on the _Superman II - Original 1980/81 Theatrical Release_ disc
and the eight Famous Studios cartoons are on the _Superman II - The 2006
Richard Donner Cut_ disc.

A Blu-ray set containing all the cartoons, called _Max Fleischer's Superman:
Collector's Edition_ was released October 30, 2012 by the Gaiam studio.
According to Blu-Ray.com and Amazon reviews, it was upscaled from standard
definition to HD, and the set's video quality and audio quality were
criticized.[14]

As all of these cartoons are now in the public domain,[2] free downloadable
links from the Internet Archive have been provided.

**Former:**

