_**Ice Age**_ is a 2002 American computer-animated comedy film directed by
Chris Wedge and co-directed by Carlos Saldanha from a story by Michael J.
Wilson. Produced by Blue Sky Studios as its first feature film, it was
released by 20th Century Fox on March 15, 2002. The film features the voices
of Ray Romano, John Leguizamo, and Denis Leary. Set during the days of the ice
age, the film centers around three main characters - Manny (Romano), a no-
nonsense woolly mammoth; Sid (Leguizamo), a loudmouthed ground sloth; and
Diego (Leary), a sardonic saber-tooth tiger \- who come across a human baby
and work together to return it to its tribe. Additionally, the film
occasionally follows Scrat, a speechless "saber-toothed squirrel" voiced by
Wedge who is perpetually searching for a place in the ground to bury his
acorn.

_Ice Age_ was originally intended as a 2D animated movie developed by Fox
Animation Studios, but eventually became the first full-length animated movie
for the newly-reformed Blue Sky, which had been reshaped from a special FX
house to a CG animation studio. Focus shifted from making an action-adventure
drama film to a more comedy-oriented one, and several writers, such as Michael
Berg and Peter Ackerman, were brought on to bring out a wittier tone.

Upon release, _Ice Age_ was met with mostly positive reviews and was nominated
at the 75th Academy Awards for Best Animated Feature, losing to _Spirited
Away_. It was a box office success by grossing over $383 million, starting the
_Ice Age_ franchise. It was followed by four sequels, _Ice Age: The Meltdown_
in 2006, _Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs_ in 2009, _Ice Age: Continental
Drift_ in 2012, and _Ice Age: Collision Course_ in 2016.

A saber-toothed squirrel known as Scrat attempts to find a place to store his
acorn for the winter. Eventually, as he tries to stomp it into the ground, he
inadvertently causes a large crack to form in the ice that extends for miles
before setting off a large avalanche which nearly crushes him. He barely
escapes but finds himself getting stepped on by a herd of prehistoric animals
migrating south in order to escape the forthcoming ice age. Sid, a clumsy
ground sloth, is left behind by his family and decides to move on by himself,
but is attacked by two prehistoric rhinos after ruining their meal and making
them angry. Sid is soon rescued by Manny, a gruff woolly mammoth heading
north, who fights the rhinos off and continues on his path. Sid joins Manny,
not wanting to be alone and unprotected. Manny is annoyed by Sid's outgoing
demeanor and wishes to migrate on his own, but Sid nonetheless continues to
follow Manny. Meanwhile, Soto, the leader of a pack of saber-toothed tigers,
wants revenge on a group of humans for killing half of his pack, by eating the
chief's infant son, Roshan,[2] alive. Soto leads a raid on the human camp,
during which the baby's mother is separated from everyone else and jumps down
a waterfall upon being cornered by Soto's lieutenant, Diego. As punishment for
his failure to retrieve the baby, Diego is sent to find and retrieve the baby.

Later, Sid and Manny encounter the baby and his mother near the lake, having
survived her plunge. The mother only has enough strength to entrust her baby
to Manny before she disappears into the water. After much persuasion by Sid,
they decide to return the baby, but when they reach the human settlement, they
find it deserted. They meet up with Diego, who convinces the pair to let him
help by tracking the humans. The four travel on, with Diego secretly leading
them to half-peak where his pack is waiting to ambush them.

After encountering several misadventures on their way, the group reaches a
cave with several cave paintings made by humans. There, Sid and Diego learn
about Manny's past and his previous interactions with the human hunters, in
which his family was killed, leaving Manny a loner. Later, Manny, Sid, Diego,
and the baby almost reach their destination, Half-Peak, only to encounter a
river of lava. Manny and Sid, along with the baby, make it across safely, but
Diego freezes, about to fall into the lava. Manny saves him, narrowly missing
certain death by falling into the lava himself. The herd takes a break for the
night, and the baby takes his first walking steps towards Diego, who starts to
have a change of heart about his mission.

The next day, the herd approaches the ambush, causing Diego, now full of
respect for Manny for saving his life to change his mind and confess to Manny
and Sid about the ambush. As the pair turn hostile towards him, Diego asks for
their trust and tries to foil the attack. The herd battles Soto's pack, but
despite their efforts, Soto's associates manage to corner Manny. As Soto
closes in for the kill on Manny, Diego sacrifices himself by jumping in the
way and is injured as a result. Manny then knocks a distracted Soto into a
rock wall, causing several sharp icicles to fall onto Soto, killing him.
Horrified, the rest of the pack retreat. Manny and Sid mourn for Diego's
injury, which they believe is fatal, and continue their journey without him.
The two manage to successfully return the baby to his tribe, and to their
surprise, Diego manages to rejoin them, in time to see the baby leave. The
group then begin to head off to warmer climates.

20,000 years later, Scrat, frozen in a block of ice, ends up on the shores of
a tropical island. As the ice slowly melts, an acorn that was also frozen in
the same ice block is washed away. Scrat then finds a coconut and tries to
stomp it into the ground, only to mistakenly trigger a volcanic eruption.

The characters are all prehistoric animals. The animals can talk to and
understand each other and are voiced by a variety of famous actors. Like many
films of prehistoric life, the rules of time periods apply very loosely, as
many of the species shown in the film never actually lived in the same time
periods or the same geographic regions.

_Ice Age_ was originally pitched to 20th Century Fox in 1997 by producer Lori
Forte. The film, originally envisioned as a traditionally animated movie with
an action-oriented comedy-drama tone, was intended to be developed by Don
Bluth and Gary Goldman's Fox Animation Studios. Around the same time, Blue Sky
Studios, a small special FX studio in White Plains, New York, was bought out
by Fox and reshaped into a full-fledged CG animation film studio. In light of
this, Fox Animation head Chris Meledandri and executive producer Steve
Bannerman approached Forte with the proposition of developing the film as a
computer-animated movie, which Forte realized was "basically a no-brainer,"
according to her. Michael J. Wilson, who had written and developed the film's
original story treatments in conjunction with Forte, wrote the first draft for
the script, and Chris Wedge, the co-founder of Blue Sky, was brought on to the
project as the director in late 1998. Fox also opted for the movie to take a
more comedy-oriented direction (albeit while still maintaining some dramatic
elements[3]), and brought writer Michael Berg to help emphasize a funnier
tone. After being hired, Berg reportedly told the studio that he couldn't
write a kid's film, to which the studio responded "Great! Just write a good
story."[4]

Story development began in spring of 1999,[5] and official production on the
movie began in June 2000, one week following the disclosure of Fox Animation
Studios.[6] 150 employees were hired to work on the movie,[4] and a budget of
$58 million was granted by Fox.[6] Peter Ackerman was hired as a third writer
for the movie, and collaborated extensively with Berg for three years before
the two eventually moved on from the project. Jon Vitti and Mike Reiss, both
former writers for _The Simpsons_ , were added later on after Berg and
Ackerman left to further polish the script.[4]

For research, the film's development team took several trips to the Museum of
Natural History early on in production in order to make sure that the film
authentically felt like the Ice Age.[7] Ultimately, the team translated the
information that they had compiled in their research by stylizing it in order
to fit with the film's story.[8] A team of 32 animators went out and did
research to figure out the movements of different animals; for instance, for
the movement of Scrat, animators visited a park and observed local squirrels,
taking note of their "twitchy" way of moving.[5]

Michael J. Wilson stated on his blog that his daughter Flora came up with the
idea for an animal that was a mixture of both squirrel and rat, naming it
Scrat, and that the animal was obsessed with pursuing his acorn.[9] The plan
to have Scrat talk was quickly dropped, as he worked better as a silent
character for comedic effect. The name 'Scrat' is a combination of the words
'squirrel' and 'rat', as Scrat has characteristics of both species; Wedge has
also called him "saber-toothed squirrel." Scrat's opening adventure was
inserted because, without it, the first real snow and ice sequence wouldn't
take place until about 37 minutes into the film. This was the only role
intended for Scrat, but he proved to be such a popular character with test
audiences that he was given more scenes. The filmmakers made it so that many
of the scenes with Scrat appear directly after dramatic moments in the film.

In a 2012 interview with Jay Leno, Denis Leary revealed that his character,
Diego the sabertooth, originally died near the end of the film. However, it
was reported that kids in the test audience bursted into tears when his death
was shown. Leary himself warned the producers that something like this would
happen. When it was proven true, the scene was re-written to ensure Diego
survived.

Originally, Sid the sloth was supposed to be a con-artist and a hustler, and
there was even finished scene of the character conning some aardvark kids. His
character was later changed to a talkative-clumsy sloth because the team felt
the audience would have hated him. There was also an alternate scene of Sid in
the hottub with the ladies which shows him saying to them "Let's jump in the
gene pool and see what happens." One of the female sloths then kicks him in
the groin. This was cut because it was not suitable for children and may have
gotten the film a PG-13 rating. Other innuendos with Sid were also cut from
the film. Sid was also supposed to have a female sloth named Sylvia (voiced by
Kristen Johnston) chasing after him, whom he despised and kept ditching. All
the removed scenes can be seen on the DVD.

The characters and environments in _Ice Age_ were modeled and animated using
WaveFront's Maya animation software. Rendering was completed using CGI Studio,
an in-house ray tracing program being developed since Blue Sky's formation in
1987 and previously used for Wedge's 1999 short film, _Bunny_. While _Jimmy
Neutron: Boy Genius_ , released three months before _Ice Age_ , became the
first computer-animated film to make use of ray tracing technology, Ice Age
would have received the distinction had it been released at the time Blue Sky
began work on the movie.[5]

The voice talents in _Ice Age_ were encouraged to make up their own dialogue
during recording. Several lines in the film were improvised by the actors.[10]

For Manny the Mammoth, the studio was initially looking at people with big
voices.[11] James Earl Jones and Ving Rhames were considered, but they sounded
too obvious and Wedge wanted more comedy.[12][13] Instead, the role was given
to Ray Romano because they thought his voice sounded very elephant-like. Wedge
described Romano's voice as deep and slow in delivery, but also with a
"sarcastic wit behind it."[13]

John Leguizamo, who provided the voice for Sid the Sloth, experimented with
over 40 voices for the character, including a slower-sounding voice to fit
with the lazy nature of a giant sloth. Leguizamo came up with the final voice
for the character after watching footage of sloths and learning that they
store food in the pockets of their mouths which ferments over time.[14]
Leguizamo remarked in an interview with BBC that he had wanted to contribute
to an animated project for a while, claiming that cartoon voice actor Mel
Blanc was "one of my comedy Gods" and a large source of inspiration for him as
a child.[5]

The official CD soundtrack to _Ice Age_ was released on May 14, 2002 by Varèse
Sarabande. The soundtrack consists of the original musical score composed for
the film by David Newman and performed by the Hollywood Studio Symphony. The
song "Send Me On My Way" and the ending credits are absent from the album.[15]

_Ice Age_ was released on March 15, 2002, and had a $46.3 million opening
weekend, a large number not usually seen until the summer season, and way
ahead of Fox's most optimistic projection of about $30 million. _Ice Age_
broke the record for a March opening (later surpassed in 2006 by its sequel,
_Ice Age: The Meltdown_ ) and at the time was the third-best opening ever for
an animated feature—after _Monsters, Inc._ ($62.6 million) and _Toy Story 2_
($57.4 million).[16] _Ice Age_ finished its domestic box office run with
$176,387,405 and grossed $383,257,136 worldwide, being the 9th highest gross
of 2002 in North America and the 8th best worldwide at the time.[1]

_Ice Age_ holds a 77% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 166 reviews,
with an average rating of 6.85/10. The site's consensus reads: "Even though
_Ice Age_ is treading over the same grounds as _Monsters, Inc._ and _Shrek_ ,
it has enough wit and laughs to stand on its own."[17] Similar site Metacritic
had a score of 60% out of 31 reviews, meaning "mixed or average reviews".[18]
Roger Ebert of the _Chicago Sun-Times_ gave the film 3 stars out of 4 and
wrote "I came to scoff and stayed to smile". Elvis Mitchell of the New York
Times called the film a "blandly likeable computer-animation extravaganza",
comparing the film's plot to the Western film _3 Godfathers_.[19]

CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend, cinema audiences gave
_Ice Age_ an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.[20]

_Ice Age_ was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Animated Feature, but
lost to _Spirited Away_.[21]

The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists:

The initial home video release for _Ice Age_ was accompanied by an $85 million
marketing campaign involving promotional partnerships with 14 different
companies,[23] including Microsoft, Pizza Hut, Carl's Jr., Dole, Langer's,
Valpak, Cold Stone Creamery, and the National Hockey League.[24] The movie was
released on 2-disc DVD, VHS and D-Theater[25] on November 26, 2002. All three
releases included _Gone Nutty_ , a short film starring Scrat and detailing his
further antics as he tries to bury his acorn.[26] Another single disc release
was released February 5, 2005,[27] and the next year a new 2 disc release with
extra features on March 14, 2006.[28] The film was released on Blu-ray on
March 4, 2008, and beside _Gone Nutty_ , it included 9 minutes of deleted
scenes.[29]

A tie-in video game was developed by Artificial Mind and Movement and
published by Ubisoft for the Game Boy Advance. A platform game, it has the
player controlling Sid and Manny through 10 levels as they carry Roshan. The
game holds an aggregate ranking of 46.00% on GameRankings[30] and 47/100 on
Metacritic.[31]

Since the release of _Ice Age_ , several sequels have followed. _Ice Age: The
Meltdown_ , the first sequel, was released on March 31, 2006, following the
main characters trying to escape a massive flooding due to global warming, as
well as Manny's concern over whether or not his species is going extinct. A
third installment, _Ice Age: Dawn of the Dinosaurs_ , was released in 2009,
followed by a fourth film, _Ice Age: Continental Drift_ , in 2012. The fifth
and latest installment, _Ice Age: Collision Course_ , was released on July 22,
2016.[32] With the release of _Collision Course_ , the _Ice Age_ series became
the first animated movie franchise to house five theatrical installments.[33]
The sequels experienced steadily declining critical reception but were box
office successes nonetheless.[34]

