_**Undertow**_ is a 2004 American psychological thriller film directed by
David Gordon Green and starring Jamie Bell, Devon Alan, Dermot Mulroney and
Josh Lucas. Taking place in Georgia, the film tells the story of two boys
pursued by a murderous uncle.

Met with a mixed response from critics,[1][2] the film received special
recognition for excellence in filmmaking from the National Board of Review of
Motion Pictures.[3][4] In addition, Jamie Bell and Devon Alan won Young Artist
Awards for their roles in the film.[3][5]

Themes of the story are greed and family hatred.

Following the death of his wife Audrey, John Munn (Dermot Mulroney) moves with
his two sons, mid-teen Chris Munn (Jamie Bell) and adolescent Tim Munn (Devon
Alan), to a pig farm in rural Drees County, Georgia, where they lead a
reclusive life. Chris is a rebellious, troubled teen, resulting in frequent
contact with police.

John's brother Deel (Josh Lucas) visits the family. Two boys are surprised;
they did not even know of his existence. Deel wants a hoard of gold coins from
John. Deel eventually finds them. John refuses to give them to Deel. In the
ensuing struggle, Deel murders him. He tries to kill Chris and Tim as well,
but they escape and run away from home with the coins.

On the run, the boys meet an assortment of fairytale-like characters. Deel
pursues them, eventually succeeding. Wading into a river, Chris throws away
the gold coins into the water. Enraged by the loss, Deel struggles with Chris,
attempting to drown him. However, Deel is fatally stabbed in the chest.

Chris appears to wake up in hospital. There, he is reunited with Tim and their
grandparents.

The film received mixed reviews from film critics, whose responses ranged from
admiration to derision.[1][2] On Rotten Tomatoes, it holds an approval rating
of 55% based on 116 reviews.[1] On Metacritic, the film earned a score of 63%
based on 30 reviews.[2]

Among the critics who gave the film a positive review were Roger Ebert, who
praised the film, giving it a full four stars. He wrote of the director,
"Green has a visual style that is beautiful without being pretty. We never
catch him photographing anything for its scenic or decorative effect."[6]
Ebert would later place the film 10th on his list of the best films of
2004.[7] Owen Gleiberman of _Entertainment Weekly_ gave the film a favorable
review, calling it an "art film posing as a backwoods gothic thriller."[8]
Eric Harrison of the _Houston Chronicle_ wrote, "From its opening lines and
first enigmatic image, everything about Undertow is both dreamlike and real,
artfully elusive and matter-of-fact."[9] Movie critic James Berardinelli gave
it three out of four stars, giving praise to the performances, and writing,
"Those going to Undertow expecting a thriller will find the proceedings slow
going. However, those who are seduced by the characters and the setting will
find that the 105 minutes pass quickly."[10] The _Washington Post's_ Stephen
Hunter thought the film conjured up the 1955 thriller _The Night of the
Hunter_ , and wrote, "the movie builds slowly to its grinding climax, and the
suspense – the standard by which a thriller must primarily be judged – is
first-rate."[11]

