_**Frozen**_ is a 2013 American 3D computer-animated musical fantasy film
produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and released by Walt Disney
Pictures.[5] The 53rd Disney animated feature film, it is inspired by Hans
Christian Andersen's fairy tale "The Snow Queen".[6] It tells the story of a
fearless princess who sets off on a journey alongside a rugged iceman, his
loyal reindeer, and a naive snowman to find her estranged sister, whose icy
powers have inadvertently trapped their kingdom in eternal winter.

_Frozen_ underwent several story treatments before being commissioned in 2011,
with a screenplay written by Jennifer Lee, who also co-directed with Chris
Buck. The film features the voices of Kristen Bell, Idina Menzel, Jonathan
Groff, Josh Gad, and Santino Fontana. Christophe Beck was hired to compose the
film's orchestral score, while Robert Lopez and Kristen Anderson-Lopez wrote
the songs.

_Frozen_ premiered at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood, California, on
November 19, 2013,[7] had a limited release on November 22 and went into
general theatrical release on November 27. It was met with praise for its
visuals, screenplay, themes, music, and voice acting; some film critics
consider _Frozen_ to be the best Disney animated feature film since the
studio's renaissance era.[8][9] The film also achieved significant commercial
success, earning $1.276 billion in worldwide box office revenue, including
$400 million in the United States and Canada and $247 million in Japan. It
went on to surpass _Toy Story 3_ (which was also distributed by Disney) as the
highest-grossing animated film at the time as well as the highest grossing
musical film before being surpassed by the remake of _The Lion King_ in 2019;
it also ranks as the 15th highest-grossing film of all time, the highest-
grossing film of 2013, and the third highest-grossing film in Japan. It was
also the highest-earning film with a female director in terms of US earnings,
until surpassed by Warner Bros. Pictures' _Wonder Woman_.[10] With over 18
million home media sales in 2014, it became the best-selling film of the year
in the United States. By January 2015, _Frozen_ had become the all-time best-
selling Blu-ray Disc in the United States.[11]

_Frozen_ won two Academy Awards for Best Animated Feature and Best Original
Song ("Let It Go"),[12] the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature
Film,[13] the BAFTA Award for Best Animated Film,[14] five Annie Awards
(including Best Animated Feature),[15] two Grammy Awards for Best Compilation
Soundtrack for Visual Media and Best Song Written for Visual Media ("Let It
Go"),[16] and two Critics' Choice Movie Awards for Best Animated Feature and
Best Original Song ("Let It Go").[17] An animated short sequel, _Frozen Fever_
, premiered on March 13, 2015,[18] an animated featurette titled _Olaf's
Frozen Adventure_ , premiered on November 22, 2017, and a feature-length
sequel, _Frozen 2_ , is set for release on November 22, 2019.[19][20][21]

Princess Elsa of Arendelle possesses magic powers that allow her to control
and create ice and snow, often using it to play with her younger sister, Anna.
After Elsa accidentally injures Anna with her magic, their parents, the King
and Queen, take both siblings to a colony of trolls led by Grand Pabbie. He
heals Anna, but alters her memories to remove traces of Elsa's magic, warning
Elsa that she must learn to control her powers. He also states that fear will
be Elsa's greatest enemy. The King and Queen isolate both sisters within the
castle. Elsa shuts Anna out, causing a rift between them. Unable to control
it, Elsa can only suppress her power, causing her to become more insecure.
When the sisters are teenagers, their parents die at sea during a storm.

When Elsa turns 21, she is to be crowned queen of Arendelle. She is terrified
that the kingdom's citizens might find out about her powers and fear her. The
castle gates open to the public and visiting dignitaries for the first time in
years. Among them is the scheming Duke of Weselton and the dashing Prince Hans
of the Southern Isles, the latter of whom Anna falls in love with at first
sight. Elsa's coronation happens without a hitch, but she still remains
distant from Anna. When Hans proposes to Anna, Elsa objects, accidentally
unleashing her powers before the court; the Duke brands her a monster. Elsa
flees to the North Mountain, where she finally acknowledges her powers,
building a palace of ice in which to live a hermit life. In the process
however, her suppressed magic engulfs Arendelle in an eternal winter.

Anna ventures out to find Elsa and end the winter, leaving Hans in command.
She gets lost, collecting supplies at Wandering Oaken's shop. She meets an ice
harvester named Kristoff and his reindeer, Sven, convincing them to take her
to the mountains. An attack by wolves leads to Kristoff's sleigh being
destroyed. On foot, they meet Olaf, a cheerful snowman brought to life
unknowingly by Elsa, who offers to lead them to her. When Anna's horse returns
to Arendelle, Hans sets out to find Anna and Elsa, accompanied by the Duke's
minions, who have secret orders to kill Elsa.

Reaching the ice palace, Anna meets Elsa, but when she reveals what has become
of Arendelle, Elsa becomes upset, saying that she cannot undo it, and
accidentally freezes Anna's heart, poisoning her. She then makes a giant snow
monster named Marshmallow, who chases Anna, Kristoff, and Olaf away. Realizing
the effects of Elsa's spell on Anna, Kristoff takes her to the trolls, his
adoptive family. Grand Pabbie reveals that Anna will freeze solid unless "an
act of true love" reverses the spell. Kristoff races Anna back home so Hans
can give her true love's kiss. Hans and his men reach Elsa's palace, defeating
Marshmallow and capturing Elsa. Anna is delivered to Hans but, rather than
kissing her, Hans instead reveals that he has actually been plotting to seize
the throne of Arendelle by eliminating both sisters. Hans locks Anna in a room
to die, and then manipulates the dignitaries into believing that Elsa killed
her. He orders the queen's execution, only to discover she has escaped her
detention cell.

Olaf frees Anna, and they venture into the blizzard outside to meet Kristoff,
whom Olaf reveals is in love with her. Hans confronts Elsa outside, claiming
that she killed Anna, causing Elsa to break down and abruptly stop the storm.
Anna spots Hans about to kill Elsa; she leaps in the way and freezes solid,
stopping Hans. Devastated, Elsa hugs and mourns over her sister, who thaws
out, her heroism constituting "an act of true love". Realizing that love is
the key to controlling her magic, Elsa ends the winter and gives Olaf his own
snow flurry to survive the warmer climate. Hans is arrested and exiled from
the kingdom for his attempted assassination, while the Duke's trade links with
Arendelle are cut off. Anna gives Kristoff a new sleigh and the two kiss. Both
sisters are reunited and Elsa promises never to lock the castle gates again.

Non-speaking characters include Kristoff's reindeer companion Sven, horses,
and wolves.[46] The grunts and snorts for Sven were all provided by Frank
Welker who was not credited in the film.[47]

Walt Disney Productions first began exploring a possible live action/animation
biography film of author and poet Hans Christian Andersen sometime in late
1937 before the December premiere of its film _Snow White and the Seven
Dwarfs_ , the first feature-length hand-drawn animated film ever made.[49]:10
In March 1940, Walt Disney suggested a co-production to film producer Samuel
Goldwyn, where Goldwyn's studio would shoot the live-action sequences of
Andersen's life and Disney's studio would animate Andersen's fairy
tales.[49]:10 The animated sequences would be based on some of Andersen's best
known works, such as _The Little Mermaid_ , _The Little Match Girl_ , _The
Steadfast Tin Soldier_ , _The Snow Queen_ , _Thumbelina_ , _The Ugly Duckling_
, _The Red Shoes_ , and _The Emperor's New Clothes_. However, the studio
encountered difficulty with _The Snow Queen_ , as it could not find a way to
adapt and relate the Snow Queen character to modern audiences. Even as far
back as the 1930s and 1940s, it was clear that the source material contained
great cinematic possibilities, but the Snow Queen character proved to be too
problematic. After the United States entered World War II, the studio began to
focus on making wartime propaganda, which caused development on the
Disney–Goldwyn project to grind to a halt in 1942.[49]:10 Goldwyn went on to
produce his own live-action film version in 1952, entitled _Hans Christian
Andersen_ , with Danny Kaye as Andersen, Charles Vidor directing, Moss Hart
writing, and Frank Loesser penning the songs. All of Andersen's fairy tales
were, instead, told in song and ballet in live-action, like the rest of the
film. It went on to receive six Academy Award nominations the following year.
Back at Disney, _The Snow Queen_ , along with other Andersen fairy tales
(including _The Little Mermaid_ ), were shelved.[50]

– Producer Peter Del Vecho, on the difficulties adapting _The Snow Queen_[51]

In the late 1990s,[52] Walt Disney Feature Animation started developing a new
adaptation of _The Snow Queen_ after the tremendous success of their recent
films during the Disney Renaissance era (1989–1999), but the project was
scrapped completely in late 2002, when Glen Keane reportedly quit the
project[48] and went on to work on another project which became _Tangled_
(2010). Even before then, Harvey Fierstein pitched his version of the story to
Disney's executives, but was turned down.[50] Paul and Gaëtan Brizzi, Dick
Zondag and Dave Goetz reportedly all tried their hand at it, but failed.[50]
After a number of unsuccessful attempts from 2000 to 2002, Disney shelved the
project again.[49]:10–11 During one of those attempts, Michael Eisner, then-
chairman and chief executive officer of The Walt Disney Company, offered his
support to the project and suggested doing it with Oscar-winning director John
Lasseter at Pixar after the then-expected renewal of Pixar's contract with
Disney.[53] But negotiations between Pixar and Disney collapsed in January
2004 and that contract was never renewed.[54] Instead, Eisner's successor Bob
Iger negotiated Disney's purchase of Pixar in January 2006 for $7.4 billion,
and Lasseter was promoted to chief creative officer of both Pixar and Disney
Animation.[55][56]

The next attempt started in 2008, when Lasseter was able to convince Chris
Buck (who co-directed the 1999 film _Tarzan_ for the studio) to return to Walt
Disney Animation Studios from Sony Pictures Animation (where he had recently
co-directed the Oscar-nominated 2007 film _Surf's Up_ ); that September, Buck
pitched several ideas to Lasseter, one of which was _The Snow Queen_.[49]:6,11
Buck later revealed that his initial inspiration for _The Snow Queen_ was not
the Andersen fairy tale itself, but that he wanted "to do something different
on the definition of true love." "Disney had already done the 'kissed by a
prince' thing, so [I] thought it was time for something new," he recalled.[57]
It turned out Lasseter had been interested in _The Snow Queen_ for a long
time; back when Pixar was working with Disney on _Toy Story_ in the 1990s, he
saw and was "blown away" by some of the pre-production art from Disney's prior
attempts.[49]:6 Development began under the title _Anna and the Snow Queen_ ,
which was planned to be traditionally animated.[58] According to Josh Gad, he
first became involved with the film at that early stage, when the plot was
still relatively close to the original Andersen fairy tale and Megan Mullally
was going to play Elsa.[59] By early 2010, the project entered development
hell once again, when the studio again failed to find a way to make the story
and the Snow Queen character work.[60][61]

On December 22, 2011, following the success of _Tangled_ , Disney announced a
new title for the film, _Frozen_ , and a release date of November 27,
2013.[62] A month later, it was confirmed that the film would be a computer-
animated feature in stereoscopic 3D, instead of the originally intended hand-
drawn animation due to complex elements in the script regarding strong
visuals.[48] Kristen Anderson-Lopez and Robert Lopez joined the project and
started writing songs for _Frozen_ in January 2012.[63]:44:00 On March 5,
2012, it was announced that Buck would be directing, with Lasseter and Peter
Del Vecho producing.[64]

After Disney decided to advance _The Snow Queen_ into development again, one
of the main challenges Buck and Del Vecho faced was the character of the Snow
Queen, who was then a villain in their drafts.[50] The studio has a tradition
of screening animated films in development every twelve weeks, then holding
lengthy "notes sessions" in which its directors and screenwriters from
different projects provide extensive "notes" on each other's work.[65][66][67]

Buck and Del Vecho presented their storyboards to Lasseter, and the entire
production team adjourned to a conference to hear his thoughts on the
project.[50] Art director Michael Giaimo later acknowledged Lasseter as the
"game changer" of the film: "I remember John saying that the latest version of
_The Snow Queen_ story that Chris Buck and his team had come up with was fun,
very light-hearted. But the characters didn't resonate. They aren't multi-
faceted. Which is why John felt that audiences wouldn't really be able to
connect with them."[50]

The production team then addressed the film's problems, drafting several
variations on _The Snow Queen_ story until the characters and story felt
relevant. At that stage, the first major breakthrough was the decision to
rewrite the film's protagonist, Anna (who was based on the Gerda character
from _The Snow Queen_ ), as the younger sibling of Elsa, thereby effectively
establishing a family dynamic between the characters.[50][68][69] This was
unusual in that relationships between sisters are rarely used as a major plot
element in American animated films, with the notable exception of Disney's
_Lilo& Stitch_ (2002).[49]:13 To fully explore the unique dynamics of such
relationships, Disney Animation convened a "Sister Summit," at which women
from all over the studio who grew up with sisters were asked to discuss their
relationships with their sisters.[49]:14

In March 2012, Jennifer Lee, one of the writers of _Wreck-It Ralph_ , was
brought in as screenwriter.[70][71][72] Before Lee was brought on board, the
efforts of the previous screen and songwriters had "imploded",[63]:9:07 which
allowed the songwriters "to put a lot of [their] DNA" into the new
script.[63]:30:32 The production team "essentially started over and ... had 17
months," which resulted in a very "intense schedule" and implied "a lot of
choices had to be made fast".[72]

While developing the story, Jennifer Lee and Chris Buck drew influence from
several sources. They said the biggest influence on the film was the country
of Norway, when the art department visited the country, drawing inspiration
from the country's culture and environment. They also cited the influence of
several films, including Hayao Miyazaki's anime productions along with the
David Lean productions _Lawrence of Arabia_ (1962), and _Doctor Zhivago_
(1965), stating that they were inspired by their sense of "epic adventure and
that big scope and scale and then the intimacy of funny quirky
characters."[73]

According to Lee, several core concepts were already in place, such as the
film's "frozen heart" hook: "That was a concept and the phrase ... an act of
true love will thaw a frozen heart."[72] They already knew the ending involved
true love in the sense of the emotional bond between siblings, not romance, in
that "Anna was going to save Elsa. We didn’t know how or why."[72] Lee said
Edwin Catmull, president of Disney Animation, told her early on about the
film's ending: ".. you have to earn that ending. If you do[,] it will be
great. If you don't, it will suck".[65] However, the final version differed
sharply from the earlier ones. In the original, Elsa had been evil from the
start, kidnapping Anna from her own wedding to intentionally freeze her heart
and later descending upon the town with an army of snowmen.[63]:8:42 "The
whole second act was about Anna trying to get to Hans and to kiss him and then
Elsa trying to stop her".[72] Buck revealed that the original plot attempted
to make Anna sympathetic by focusing on her frustration as the "spare" in
relation to the "heir".[74] The pacing of the revised plot focused on musical
comedy with less action and adventure.[70]

A breakthrough was the composition of the song "Let It Go" by Lopez and
Anderson-Lopez, which forced a reimagining of Elsa as a more complex,
vulnerable, and sympathetic character.[68] In _The Daily Telegraph_ 's words,
the songwriters saw Elsa not as a villain but as "a scared girl struggling to
control and come to terms with her gift".[75] "Bobby and Kristen...started
talking about what would it feel like [to be Elsa]", Lee said. "And this
concept of letting out who she is[,] that she's kept to herself for so long[,]
and she's alone and free, but then the sadness of the fact [ _sic_ ] that the
last moment is she's alone".[72] Del Vecho explained that "Let It Go" changed
Elsa into a person "ruled by fear and Anna was ruled by her own love of other
people and her own drive", which caused Lee to "rewrite the first act and then
that rippled through the entire movie. So that was when we really found the
movie and who these characters were".[67]

Another breakthrough was developing the plot twist that Prince Hans, having
not even been in the first drafts, would be revealed as the true villain only
near the end.[67] Del Vecho said, "if we were going to make the ending so
surprising[,] you had to believe at one point that Hans was the answer ...
[when] he's not the answer, it's Kristoff ... [I]f you can get the audience to
leap ahead and think they have figured it out[,] you can surprise them by
turning it the other way".[67] Lee acknowledged that Hans was written as
"sociopathic" and "twisted".[72] "It was difficult to lay the foundation for
Anna's belated turn to Kristoff without also making Hans' betrayal of Anna too
predictable, in that the audience had to "feel ... her feeling something but
not quite understanding it ... Because the minute it is [understood,] it
deflated."[72] In earlier drafts, Anna openly flirted with Kristoff at their
first meeting, but that was changed after Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan
Horn pointed out that it would confuse and annoy viewers, since Anna was
already engaged to Hans.[76]

Lee had to work through how to write Anna's personality; some of her
colleagues felt Anna should be more dysfunctional and co-dependent.[70] Lee
disagreed, but it took her almost a year to convincingly articulate "this is
what Anna's journey is. No more than that. No less than that."[72] In the end,
Lee successfully argued for a simple coming-of-age story, "where she goes from
having a naive view of life and love – because she's lonely – to the most
sophisticated and mature view of love, where she's capable of the ultimate
love, which is sacrifice".[70] Lee also had to let go of ideas that she liked,
such as a scene portraying Anna and Elsa's relationship as teenagers, because
they needed to maintain the separation between Anna and Elsa.[70] To construct
Anna and Elsa's relationship, Lee found inspiration from her own relationship
with her older sister.[72][77] Lee called her older sister "my Elsa" in an op-
ed in the _Los Angeles Times_ , and walked the red carpet with her at the 86th
Academy Awards.[66] Lee explained, "[h]aving to ... lose each other and then
rediscover each other as adults, that was a big part of my life".[72]

The team also turned Olaf from Elsa's obnoxious sidekick into Anna's comically
innocent one.[72] Lee's initial response to the original "mean" version of
Olaf had been, "Kill the f-ing snowman", and she found Olaf by far "the
hardest character to deal with".[72] The problem of _how_ Anna would save Elsa
at the climax was solved by story artist John Ripa. At the story meeting where
Ripa pitched his take on the story, Lasseter said, "I've never seen anything
like that before", followed by a standing ovation.[49]:31 Along the way, the
team abandoned a lot of the detail of earlier drafts, such as a troll with a
Brooklyn accent to explain the backstory behind Elsa's magical powers, and a
regent for whom Lee was hoping to cast comedian Louis C.K.[72] These were
excised because they amounted to a "much more complex story than really we
felt like we could fit in this 90-minute film".[72] As Del Vecho put it, "the
more we tried to explain things at the beginning, the more complicated it
got".[78]

Given Lee's extensive involvement in the development process,[51] she was
promoted to co-director by studio heads Lasseter and Catmull in August
2012,[65][79] which was announced that November,[80] making Lee the first
woman to direct a full-length animated film from Walt Disney Animation
Studios.[68][51][67] Lee later said that she was "really moved by a lot of
what Chris had done" and that they "shared a vision" of the story, having
"very similar sensibilities".[65]

By November 2012, the team thought they had finally "cracked" the film's
story,[49]:155 but according to Del Vecho, in late February 2013 it was
realized that it still "wasn't working", which necessitated more rewriting
from February through June 2013.[78][81][82] He explained, "we rewrote songs,
we took out characters and changed everything, and suddenly the movie gelled.
But that was close. In hindsight, piece of cake, but during, it was a big
struggle."[78] Looking back, Anderson-Lopez joked she and Lopez thought they
could have ended up working as "birthday party clown[s]" if the final product
"pull[ed] ... down" their careers[63]:19:07 and recalled that "we were really
writing up until the last minute".[83] In June (five months before the
announced release date), the songwriters finally got the film working when
they composed the song "For the First Time in Forever", which, in Lopez's
words, "became the linchpin of the whole movie".[63]:19:24 That month, Disney
conducted test screenings of the part-completed film with two audiences (one
of families and the other of adults)[81] in Phoenix, Arizona,[77] at which
Lasseter and Catmull were present.[72][84] Lee recalled that it was the moment
when they realized they "had something, because the reaction was huge".[84]
Catmull told her afterwards, "you did it".[72]

Actress Kristen Bell was cast as the voice of Anna on March 5, 2012.[34][64]
Lee admitted that Bell's casting selection was influenced after the filmmakers
listened to a series of vocal tracks Bell had recorded when she was young,
where the actress performed several songs from _The Little Mermaid_ ,
including "Part of Your World".[85] Bell completed her recording sessions
while she was pregnant, and subsequently re-recorded some of her character's
lines after her pregnancy, as her voice had deepened.[86] Bell was called in
to re-record dialogue for the film "probably 20 times," which is normal for
lead roles in Disney animated films whose scripts are still evolving.[87] As
for her approach to the role of Anna, Bell enthused that she had "dreamed of
being in a Disney animated film" since she was four years old,[34] saying, "I
always loved Disney animation, but there was something about the females that
was unattainable to me. Their posture was too good and they were too well-
spoken, and I feel like I really made this girl much more relatable and
weirder and scrappier and more excitable and awkward. I'm really proud of
that."[88]

– Idina Menzel, on her impression of _Frozen_[85]

Idina Menzel, a Broadway veteran, was cast as Elsa. Menzel had formerly
auditioned for _Tangled_ , but did not get the part. However, _Tangled_ 's
casting director, Jamie Sparer Roberts, preserved a recording of Menzel's
performance on her iPhone, and on the basis of that, asked her to audition
along with Bell for _Frozen_.[89] Before they were officially cast, Menzel and
Bell deeply impressed the directors and producers at an early table read;
after reading the entire script out loud, they sang "Wind Beneath My Wings"
together as a duet, since no music had been composed yet.[30][68][89] Bell had
suggested that idea when she visited Menzel at her California home to prepare
together for the table read.[89][90] The songwriters were also present for the
table read; Anderson-Lopez said "Lasseter was in heaven" upon hearing Menzel
and Bell sing in harmony, and from that moment forward, he insisted, "Kristen
Bell and Idina Menzel have to be in the movie!"[63]:32:07 Lee said, "They sung
[ _sic_ ] it like sisters and what you mean to me[,] [a]nd there wasn't a dry
eye in the house after they sang."[67] Between December 2012 and June 2013,
the casting of additional roles was announced, including Jonathan Groff as
Kristoff,[35] Alan Tudyk as the Duke of Weselton, Santino Fontana as Prince
Hans, and Josh Gad as Olaf.[39]

Similar to _Tangled_ , _Frozen_ employed a unique artistic style by blending
together features of both computer-generated imagery (CGI) and traditional
hand-drawn animation.[91] From the beginning, Buck knew Giaimo was the best
candidate to develop the style he had in mind – which would draw from the best
Disney hand-drawn films of the 1950s, the Disney Little Golden Books, and mid-
century modern design – and persuaded him to come back to Disney to serve as
the art director for _Frozen_.[49]:33 Buck, Lasseter, and Giaimo were all old
friends who had first met at the California Institute of the Arts,[49]:33 and
Giaimo had previously served as the art director for Disney's _Pocahontas_
(1995), which Buck had worked on as a supervising animator.[92]

To create the look of _Frozen_ , Giaimo began pre-production research by
reading extensively about the entire region of Scandinavia and visiting the
Danish-themed city of Solvang near Los Angeles, but eventually zeroed in on
Norway in particular because "80 percent" of the visuals that appealed to him
were from Norway.[93] Disney eventually sponsored three research field
trips.[94] Animators and special effects specialists were dispatched to
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, to experience walking, running, and falling in deep
snow in a variety of types of attire, including long skirts (which both female
and male personnel tried on);[51][93][94][95] while lighting and arts teams
visited an Ice Hotel in Quebec City, Quebec to study how light reflects and
refracts on snow and ice.[78] Finally, Giaimo and several artists traveled to
Norway to draw inspiration from its mountains, fjords, architecture, and
culture.[94][96] "We had a very short time schedule for this film, so our main
focus was really to get the story right but we knew that John Lasseter is keen
on truth in the material and creating a believable world, and again that
doesn't mean it's a realistic world – but a believable one. It was important
to see the scope and scale of Norway, and important for our animators to know
what it's like," Del Vecho said.[97] "There is a real feeling of _Lawrence of
Arabia_ scope and scale to this," he finished.[97]

During 2012, while Giaimo and the animators and artists conducted preparatory
research and developed the film's overall look, the production team was still
struggling to develop a compelling script, as explained above. That problem
was not adequately solved until November 2012,[49]:155 and the script would
later require even more significant revisions after that point.[78][81] As a
result, the single "most daunting" challenge facing the animation team was a
short schedule of less than 12 months to turn Lee's still-evolving shooting
script into an actual film.[49]:155 Other films like Pixar's _Toy Story 2_ had
been successfully completed on even shorter schedules, but a short schedule
necessarily meant "late nights, overtime, and stress."[49]:155 Lee estimated
the total size of the entire team on _Frozen_ to be around 600 to 650 people,
"including around 70 lighting people[,] 70-plus animators," and 15 to 20
storyboard artists.[98]

Del Vecho explained how the film's animation team was organized: "On this
movie we do have character leads, supervising animators on specific
characters. The animators themselves may work on multiple characters but it's
always under one lead. I think it was different on _Tangled_ , for example,
but we chose to do it this way as we wanted one person to fully understand and
develop their own character and then be able to impart that to the crew. Hyrum
Osmond, the supervising animator on Olaf, is quiet but he has a funny, wacky
personality so we knew he'd bring a lot of comedy to it; Anna's animator,
Becky Bresee, it's her first time leading a character and we wanted her to
lead Anna."[51][68][99] Acting coach Warner Loughlin was brought in to help
the film's animators understand the characters they were creating.[95] In
order to get the general feeling of each scene, some animators did their own
acting. "I actually film myself acting the scene out, which I find very
helpful," said animation supervisor Rebecca Wilson Bresee. This helped her
discover elements that made the scene feel real and believable.[100] Elsa's
supervising animator was Wayne Unten, who asked for that role because he was
fascinated by the complexity of the character.[101] Unten carefully developed
Elsa's facial expressions in order to bring out her fear as contrasted against
Anna's fearlessness.[101] He also studied videos from Menzel's recording
sessions and animated Elsa's breathing to match Menzel's breathing.[95] Head
of Animation, Lino DiSalvo, said, "The goal for the film was to animate the
most believable CG characters you've ever seen."[102]

Regarding the look and nature of the film's cinematography, Giaimo was greatly
influenced by Jack Cardiff's work in _Black Narcissus_ (1947). According to
him, it lent a hyper-reality to the film: "Because this is a movie with such
scale and we have the Norwegian fjords to draw from, I really wanted to
explore the depth. From a design perspective, since I was stressing the
horizontal and vertical aspects, and what the fjords provide, it was perfect.
We encased the sibling story in scale." Ted D. McCord's work in _The Sound of
Music_ was another major influence for Giaimo. It was also Giaimo's idea that
_Frozen_ should be filmed in the CinemaScope widescreen process, which was
approved by Lasseter.[99] This marked _Frozen_ the first film to be completely
shot in CinemaScope since 2000's _Titan A.E._. Giaimo also wanted to ensure
that Norway's fjords, architecture and rosemaling folk art, were critical
factors in designing the environment of Arendelle. Giaimo, whose background is
in traditional animation, said that the art design environment represents a
unity of character and environment and that he originally wanted to
incorporate saturated colors, which is typically ill-advised in computer
animation.[99] For further authenticity, a live reindeer named Sage was
brought into the studio for animators to study its movements and mannerisms
for the character Sven.[103][104]

Another important issue Giaimo insisted on addressing was costumes, in that he
"knew from the start" it would be a "costume film."[49]:77 To realize that
vision, he brought in character designer Jean Gillmore to act as a dedicated
"costume designer".[105] While traditional animation simply integrates costume
design with character design and treats clothing as merely part of the
characters, computer-generated animation regards costume as almost a separate
entity with its own properties and behaviors[105] – and _Frozen_ required a
level of as-yet untried detail, down to minutiae like fabrics, buttons, trim,
and stitching.[49]:76 Gillmore explained that her "general approach was to
meld the historic silhouettes of 1840 Western Europe (give or take), with the
shapes and garment relationships and details of folk costume in early Norway,
circa 19th century."[105] This meant using primarily wool fabric with accents
of velvet, linen, and silk.[49]:75 During production, Giaimo and Gillmore "ran
around" supplying various departments with real-world samples to use as
references; they were able to draw upon both the studio's own in-house library
of fabric samples and the resources of Walt Disney Parks and Resorts' costume
division in Fullerton, California.[105] The film's "look development artists"
(the Disney job title for texture artists[106]:58–59) created the digitally
painted simulation of the appearance of surfaces, while other departments
dealt with movement, rigging and weight, thickness and lighting of textile
animation.[105]

During production, the film's English title was changed from _The Snow Queen_
to _Frozen_ , a decision that drew comparisons to another Disney film,
_Tangled_. Peter Del Vecho explained that "the title _Frozen_ came up
independently of the title _Tangled_. It's because, to us, it represents the
movie. _Frozen_ plays on the level of ice and snow but also the frozen
relationship, the frozen heart that has to be thawed. We don't think of
comparisons between _Tangled_ and _Frozen_ , though." He also mentioned that
the film will still retain its original title, _The Snow Queen_ , in some
countries: "because that just resonated stronger in some countries than
_Frozen_. Maybe there's a richness to _The Snow Queen_ in the country's
heritage and they just wanted to emphasize that."[51]

The studio also developed several new tools to generate realistic and
believable shots, particularly the heavy and deep snow and its interactions
with the characters. Disney wanted an "all-encompassing" and organic tool to
provide snow effects but not require switching between different methods.[107]
As noted above, several Disney artists and special effects personnel traveled
to Wyoming to experience walking through deep snow.[93] Dr. Kenneth Libbrecht,
a professor from the California Institute of Technology, was invited to give
lectures to the effects group on how snow and ice form, and why snowflakes are
unique.[93] Using this knowledge, the effects group created a snowflake
generator that allowed them to randomly create 2,000 unique snowflake shapes
for the film.[100]

Another challenge that the studio had to face was to deliver shots of heavy
and deep snow that both interacted believably with characters and had a
realistic sticky quality.[107] According to principal software engineer Andrew
Selle, "[Snow]'s not really a fluid. It’s not really a solid. It breaks apart.
It can be compressed into snowballs. All of these different effects are very
difficult to capture simultaneously."[93] In order to achieve this, software
engineers used advanced mathematics (the material point method) and physics,
with assistance from mathematics researchers at the University of California,
Los Angeles[108][109] to create a snow simulator software application called
_Matterhorn_. The tool was capable of depicting realistic snow in a virtual
environment and was used in at least 43 scenes in the film, including several
key sequences.[68][107][108][110] Software engineer Alexey Stomakhin referred
to snow as "an important character in the film,"[108] therefore it attracted
special attention from the filmmakers.[93] "When you stretch it, snow will
break into chunks. Since snow doesn't have any connections, it doesn't have a
mesh, it can break very easily. So that was an important property we took
advantage of," explained Selle. "There you see [Kristoff] walking through and
see his footprints breaking the snow into little pieces and chunk up and you
see [Anna] being pulled out and the snow having packed together and broken
into pieces. It's very organic how that happens. You don't see that they're
pieces already – you see the snow as one thing and then breaking up."[107] The
tool also proved to be particularly useful in scenes involving characters
walking through deep snow, as it ensured that the snow reacted naturally to
each step.[93]

Other tools designed to help artists complete complicated effects included
_Spaces_ , which allowed Olaf's deconstructible parts to be moved around and
rebuilt, _Flourish_ , which allowed extra movement such as leaves and twigs to
be art-directed; _Snow Batcher_ , which helped preview the final look of the
snow, especially when characters were interacting with an area of snow by
walking through a volume, and _Tonic_ , which enabled artists to sculpt their
characters' hair as procedural volumes.[107] _Tonic_ also aided in animating
fur and hair elements such as Elsa's hair, which contains 420,000 computer-
generated strands, while the average number for a real human being is only
100,000.[93] The number of character rigs in _Frozen_ is 312 and the number of
simulated costumes also reached 245 cloth rigs, which were far beyond all
other Disney films to date.[28][100] Fifty effects artists and lighting
artists worked together on the technology to create "one single shot" in which
Elsa builds her ice palace. Its complexity required 30 hours to render each
frame, with 4,000 computers rendering one frame at a time.[111][112]

Besides 3D effects, the filmmakers also used 2D artwork and drawings for
specific elements and sequences in the film, including Elsa's magic and snow
sculptures, as well as freezing fountains and floors.[107][110] The effects
group created a "capture stage" where the entire world of _Frozen_ gets
displayed on monitors, which can be "filmed" on special cameras to operate a
three-dimensional scene. "We can take this virtual set that's mimicking all of
my actions and put it into any one of our scenes in the film," said technology
manager Evan Goldberg.[100]

The setting was principally based on Norway, and the cultural influences in
the film come from Scandinavian culture.[113] Several landmarks in Norway
appear in the film, including the Akershus Fortress in Oslo, the Nidaros
Cathedral in Trondheim, and Bryggen in Bergen. Numerous other typical cultural
Scandinavian elements are also included in the film, such as stave
churches,[113] trolls,[114] Viking ships, a hot spring, Fjord horses,[115]
clothes,[93] and food such as lutefisk.[116][117] A maypole is also present in
the film, as well as the brief appearance of runes in a book that Anna and
Elsa's father opens to figure out where the trolls live.[114] A scene where
two men argue over whether to stack firewood bark up or bark down is a
reference to the perennial Norwegian debate over how to stack firewood
properly.[118][119] The film also contains several elements specifically drawn
from Sámi culture, such as the usage of reindeer for transportation and the
equipment used to control these, clothing styles (the outfits of the ice
cutters), and parts of the musical score.[120][121] Decorations, such as those
on the castle pillars and Kristoff's sled, are also in styles inspired by Sámi
duodji decorations. During their field work in Norway, Disney's team, for
inspiration, visited Rørosrein, a Sámi family-owned company in the village
Plassje that produces reindeer meat and arranges tourist events.[122]
Arendelle was inspired by Nærøyfjord, a branch of Norway's longest fjord
Sognefjorden, which has been listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site;[123]
while a castle in Oslo with beautiful hand-painted patterns on all four walls
served as the inspiration for the kingdom's royal castle interior.[124]

The filmmakers' trip to Norway provided essential knowledge for the animators
to come up with the design aesthetic for the film in terms of color, light,
and atmosphere. According to Giaimo, there were three important factors that
they had acquired from the Norway research trip: the fjords and the massive
vertical rock formations characteristic of fjords, which serve as the setting
for the secluded kingdom of Arendelle; the medieval stave churches, whose
rustic triangular rooflines and shingles inspired the castle compound; and the
rosemaling folk art, whose distinctive paneling and grid patterns informed the
architecture, decor, and costumes.[99]

The songs for _Frozen_ were written and composed by the husband-and-wife
songwriting team of Robert Lopez and Kristen Anderson-Lopez, both of whom had
previously worked with Disney Animation on _Winnie the Pooh_ (2011) (also
produced by Del Vecho, who then hired them for _Frozen_[81]) and before that,
with Disney Parks on _Finding Nemo – The Musical_ (2007).[30][125][126] Lopez
first heard Disney Animation's pitch while in Los Angeles working on _The Book
of Mormon_ , but Disney was so eager to get both of them on board that the
production team traveled to New York City to also pitch the film in person to
Anderson-Lopez (who was busy raising the couple's two young daughters).[127]
Lopez believes Disney was particularly interested in his wife's strong story
talent.[128] The decision, of course, was easy: "Whenever Disney asks if you
want to do a fairy tale musical, you say yes."[128]

About 23 minutes of the film are dedicated to their musical numbers.[129][130]
Because they live in New York City, collaborating closely with the production
team in Burbank required two-hour-long transcontinental videoconferences
nearly every weekday for about 14 months.[96][126][131][132] For each song
they composed, they recorded a demo in their home studio (with both of them
singing the lyrics and Lopez accompanying on piano), then emailed it to
Burbank for discussion at the next videoconference.[133] Lopez and Anderson-
Lopez were aware of the fact that their work would be compared to that of Alan
Menken and Howard Ashman from the Disney Renaissance era, and whenever they
felt lost, they asked "What would Ashman do?"[134] In the end, they wrote 25
songs for the film, of which eight made it into the final version.[134] One
song ("For the First Time in Forever") had a reprise and the other ("Let It
Go") was covered by Demi Lovato over the final credits, for a total of ten
songs. Seven of the 17 that did not make it were later released on the deluxe
edition soundtrack.

In February 2013, Christophe Beck was hired to score the film, following his
work on _Paperman_ , a Disney animated short film released the year prior to
_Frozen_.[135] It was revealed on September 14, 2013, that Sámi musician Frode
Fjellheim's _Eatnemen Vuelie_ would be the film's opening song, as it contains
elements of the traditional Sámi singing style joik.[136] The music producers
recruited a Norwegian linguist to assist with the lyrics for an Old Norse song
written for Elsa's coronation[137] and traveled to Trondheim, Norway,[134] to
record the all-female choir Cantus, for a piece inspired by traditional Sámi
music.[137]

Under the supervision of sound engineer David Boucher, the lead cast members
began recording the film's vocal tracks in October 2012 at the Sunset Sound
recording studio in Hollywood _before_ the songs had been orchestrated,
meaning they heard only Lopez's demo piano track in their headphones as they
sang.[138] Most of the dialogue was recorded at the Roy E. Disney Animation
Building in Burbank under the supervision of original dialogue mixer Gabriel
Guy, who also mixed the film's sound effects.[87] Some dialogue was recorded
after recording songs at both Sunset Sound and Capitol Studios; for scenes
involving Anna and Elsa, both studios offered vocal isolation booths where
Menzel and Bell could read dialogue with line-of-sight with one another, while
avoiding "bleedthrough" between their respective tracks.[87] Additional
dialogue was recorded at an ADR facility on the Walt Disney Studios lot in
Burbank (across the street from the Disney Animation building) and at the
Soundtrack Group's New York studio,[87] since the production team had to work
around the busy schedules of the film's New York-based cast members like
Fontana.[139]

Lopez and Anderson-Lopez's piano-vocal scores for the songs along with the
vocal tracks were sent to Salem, Oregon-based Dave Metzger for arrangement and
orchestration;[138][140] Metzger also orchestrated a significant portion of
Beck's score.[126]

For the orchestral film score, Beck paid homage to the Norway- and Sápmi-
inspired setting by employing regional instruments, such as the bukkehorn, and
traditional vocal techniques, such as kulning.[137] Beck worked with Lopez and
Anderson-Lopez on incorporating their songs into arrangements in the score.
The trio's goal "was to create a cohesive musical journey from beginning to
end."[137] Similarly, Beck's scoring mixer, Casey Stone (who also supervised
the recording of the score), worked with Boucher to align their microphone
setups to ensure the transitions between the songs and score were seamless,
even though they were separately recorded on different dates.[138] The final
orchestrations of both the songs and score were all recorded at the Eastwood
Scoring Stage[138][141] on the Warner Bros. Pictures studio lot in Burbank by
an 80-piece orchestra, featuring 32 vocalists, including native Norwegian
Christine Hals.[137] Boucher supervised the recording of Anderson-Lopez and
Lopez's songs from July 22 to 24, 2013, then Stone supervised the recording of
Beck's score from September 3 to 6 and 9 to 10. Boucher mixed the songs at the
Eastwood stage, while Stone mixed the score at Beck's personal studio in Santa
Monica, California.[138]

Regarding the sound of _Frozen_ , director Jennifer Lee stated that sound
played a huge part in making the film "visceral" and "transported"; she
explained, "[i]n letting it tell the story emotionally, the sound of the ice
when it's at its most dangerous just makes you shudder."[142] The complete
silence at the climax of the film right after Anna freezes was Lasseter's
idea, one he "really wanted".[142] In that scene, even the ambient sound that
would normally be there was taken out in order to make it feel unusual.[142]
Lee explained "that was a moment where we wanted everything to feel
suspended."[142]

To obtain certain snow and ice sound effects, sound designer Odin Benitez
traveled to Mammoth Mountain, California, to record them at a frozen lake.[96]
However, the foley work for the film was recorded on the foley stage on the
Warner Bros. Pictures lot by a Warner Bros. crew.[87][141] The foley artists
received daily deliveries of 50 pounds (22.6 kg) of snow ice while working, to
help them record all the necessary snow and ice sounds for the film.[87]
Because the film's visuals were finalized so late, five separate versions of
nearly every footstep on snow were recorded (corresponding to five different
types of snow), then one was later selected during mixing to match the snow as
rendered in the final version of each scene.[87] One issue that the production
team was "particular" about was the sound of Elsa's footsteps in the ice
palace, which required eight attempts, including wine glasses on ice and metal
knives on ice; they ended up using a mix of three sounds.[87]

Although the vocals, music, sound effects, and almost all the dialogue were
all recorded elsewhere, the final re-recording mix to Dolby Atmos format was
performed at the Disney lot by Casey E. Fluhr of Disney Digital Studio
Services.[87][141]

Like other Disney media products which are often localized through Disney
Character Voices International, _Frozen_ was translated and dubbed into 41
languages (compared with only 15 for _The Lion King_ ).[143] A major challenge
was to find sopranos capable of matching Menzel's warm vocal tone and three-
octave vocal range in their native languages.[143][144] Rick Dempsey, the
unit's senior executive, regarded the process of translating the film as
"exceptionally challenging"; he explained, "It's a difficult juggling act to
get the right intent of the lyrics and also have it match rhythmically to the
music. And then you have to go back and adjust for lip sync! [It]...requires a
lot of patience and precision."[145] Lopez explained that they were told by
Disney to remove complex wordplay and puns from their songs, to ensure the
film was easily translatable and had globally appealing lyrics.[146] For the
casting of dubbed versions, Disney required native speakers in order to
"ensure that the film feels 'local'."[145] They used Bell and Menzel's voices
as their "blueprint" in casting, and tried to match the voices "as much as
possible," meaning that they auditioned approximately 200 singers to fill the
41 slots for Elsa alone.[145] For nearly 15 dubbed versions, they cast Elsa's
singing and speaking parts separately, since not all vocalists could act the
part they were singing.[145] After casting all the other roles for all 41
languages, the international cast ended up including more than 900 people, who
voiced their roles through approximately 1,300 recording sessions.[147]

Since 2013, some local TV stations and independent studios have been dubbing
the movie in their local languages, creating some unofficial dubs. Namely:
Albanian,[148] Arabic (TV dub), Karachay-Balkar,[149] Persian[150] and
Tagalog.[151]

_Frozen_ was released theatrically in the United States on November 27, 2013,
and it was accompanied by the new Mickey Mouse animated short film, _Get a
Horse!_[152] The film's premiere was at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood,
California, on November 19, 2013,[153] and had a five-day limited release
there, starting from November 22, before going into wide release.[1][154]

Prior to the film's release, Lopez and Anderson-Lopez's "Let It Go" and "In
Summer" were previewed at the 2013 D23 Expo; Idina Menzel performed the former
live on stage.[155] A teaser trailer was released on June 18, 2013,[156][157]
followed by the release of the official trailer on September 26,
2013.[158][159][160] _Frozen_ was also promoted heavily at several Disney
theme parks including Disneyland's Fantasyland, Disney California Adventure's
_World of Color_ , Epcot's Norway pavilion, and Disneyland Paris' _Disney
Dreams!_ show;[5][161][162] Disneyland and Epcot both offered meet-and-greet
sessions involving the film's two main characters, Anna and Elsa.[163] On
November 6, 2013, Disney Consumer Products began releasing a line of toys and
other merchandise relating to the film in Disney Store and other
retailers.[164]

On January 31, 2014, a sing-along version of _Frozen_ was released in 2,057
theaters in the United States. It featured on-screen lyrics, and viewers were
invited to follow the bouncing snowflake and sing along with the songs from
the film.[165][166][167] After its wide release in Japan on March 14, 2014, a
similar sing-along version of _Frozen_ was released in the country in select
theaters on April 26. In Japanese-dubbed versions, Japanese lyrics of the
songs appeared on screen for audiences to sing along with the characters.[168]
A sing-along version of the film was released in United Kingdom on November
28, 2014.[169]

_Frozen_ was released for digital download on February 25, 2014, on Google
Play, the iTunes Store, and Amazon Video.[170] It was subsequently released by
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on Blu-ray Disc and DVD on March 18,
2014.[171] Bonus features for the Blu-ray release include[172][173] "The
Making of Frozen", a three-minute musical production about how the film was
made,[174] "D'frosted", an inside look at how Disney tried to adapt the
original fairy tale into an animated feature, four deleted scenes with
introduction by the directors, the original theatrical short _Get a Horse!_ ,
the film's teaser trailer, and "Let It Go" (End Credit Version) music videos
by Demi Lovato, Martina Stoessel, and Marsha Milan Londoh;[175][176] while the
DVD release includes the _Get a Horse!_ theatrical short, "Let It Go" musical
videos and the film's teaser trailer.[172]

On its first day of release on Blu-ray and DVD, _Frozen_ sold 3.2 million
units, becoming one of the biggest home video sellers in the last decade, as
well as Amazon's best-selling children's disc of all time.[177] The digital
download release of the film also set a record as the fastest-selling digital
release of all time.[178][179] _Frozen_ finished its first week at No. 1 in
unit sales in the United States, selling more than three times as many units
as other 19 titles in the charts combined, according to the Nielsen's sales
chart.[180] The film sold 3,969,270 Blu-ray units (the equivalent of
$79,266,322) during its first week,[181] which accounted for 50 percent of its
opening home media sales.[180] It topped the U.S. home video sales charts for
six non-consecutive weeks out of seven weeks of release, as of May 4,
2014[update].[182] In the United Kingdom, _Frozen_ debuted at No. 1 in Blu-ray
and DVD sales on the Official Video Chart.[183] According to Official Charts
Company, more than 500,000 copies of the film were sold in its two-day opening
(March 31 – April 1, 2014).[184] During its three first weeks of release in
the United Kingdom, _Frozen_ sold more than 1.45 million units, becoming the
biggest-selling video title of 2014 so far in the country.[185] _Frozen_ has
sold 2,025,000 Blu-ray Disc/DVD combo sets in Japan in 4 weeks, becoming the
fastest-selling home video to sell 2 million copies, beating the previous
record of 11 weeks by _Spirited Away_. _Frozen_ also holds the records for
highest number of home video units sold on the first official day of sales and
in the first official week of sales in Japan.[186] As of the end of 2014, the
film earned $308,026,545 in total US home media sales.[187] It is one of the
best-selling home media releases, having moved over 18 million units as of
March 2015[update].[188] As of July 2018[update], _Frozen_ is the biggest-
selling Blu-ray in the United States of all-time with over 7.5 million units
sold, narrowly beating _Avatar_.[189]

Following an announcement on August 12, 2014, a sing-along reissue of _Frozen_
was released via DVD and digital download on November 18,
2014.[190][191][192][193]

In late December 2013, The Walt Disney Company filed a trademark infringement
lawsuit in California federal court against Phase 4 Films, seeking an
injunction against the continued distribution of the Canadian film _The Legend
of Sarila_ , which had been retitled _Frozen Land_ in the United States back
then and had a logo similar to the Disney film.[194] By late January 2014, the
two companies had settled the case; the settlement stated that the
distribution and promotion of _The Legend of Sarila_ and related merchandise
must use its original title and Phase 4 must not use trademarks, logos or
other designs confusingly similar to Disney's animated release.[195][196][197]
Phase 4 was also required to pay Disney $100,000 before January 27, 2014, and
make "all practicable efforts" to remove copies of _Frozen Land_ from stores
and online distributors before March 3, 2014.[195][196]

According to copyright infringement-tracking site Excipio, _Frozen_ was the
second-most-infringed film of 2014 (behind _The Wolf of Wall Street_ ), with
over 29.9 million illegal downloads via torrent sites.[198]

In the UK, _Frozen_ was broadcast on BBC One as a Freeview premiere on
December 25, 2016.[199] It aired to 5.81 million viewers.[200]

The film had its US broadcast debut on December 11, 2016, airing on the
American Broadcasting Company under the Wonderful World of Disney
anthology.[201] The airing achieved over 6.6 million viewers, lifting ABC's
usual ratings on Sundays.[202]

It had its debut on Dutch TV on December 17, 2016, on SBS 6, with the original
English version simulcast on sister channel SBS 9.

The Japanese broadcast debut aired on Fuji TV on March 4, 2017.[203]

_Frozen_ earned $400.7 million in North America, and an estimated $890 million
in other countries, for a worldwide total of
$1,276,480,335.[4][204][205][206][207][208] Calculating in all expenses,
_Deadline Hollywood_ estimated that the film made a profit of over $400
million.[209] It is the fifteenth-highest-grossing film[210] (and was the
fifth-highest at its peak), the second highest-grossing animated film (and was
first-highest at its peak),[211][212] the highest-grossing 2013 film,[213] the
second highest-grossing Walt Disney Pictures release, and the fifth-highest-
grossing film distributed by Disney.[214] The film earned $110.6 million
worldwide in its opening weekend.[215] On March 2, 2014, its 101st day of
release, it surpassed the $1 billion mark, becoming the eighteenth film in
cinematic history, the seventh Disney-distributed film, the fifth non-sequel
film,[216] the second Disney-distributed film in 2013 (after _Iron Man 3_ ),
and the first animated film since _Toy Story 3_ to do so.[217]

_Bloomberg Business_ reported in March 2014 that outside analysts had
projected the film's total cost at somewhere around $323 million to $350
million for production, marketing, and distribution, and had also projected
that the film would generate $1.3 billion in revenue from box office ticket
sales, digital downloads, discs, and television rights.[218]

_Frozen_ became Fandango's top advance ticket seller among original animated
films, ahead of previous record-holder _Brave_ ,[219] and became the top-
selling animated film in the company's history in late January 2014.[167] The
sing-along version of the film later topped the best-selling list of the movie
ticketing service again for three days.[167] _Frozen_ opened on Friday,
November 22, 2013, exclusively at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood for a
five-day limited release and earned $342,839 before its wide opening on
Wednesday, November 27, 2013.[220] During the three-day weekend it earned
$243,390, scoring the seventh-largest per-theater average.[221] On the opening
day of its wide release, the film earned $15.2 million,[222] including $1.2
million from Tuesday late-night shows,[223] and set a record for the highest
pre-Thanksgiving Wednesday opening, ahead of _Tangled_ ($11.9 million).[224]
It was also the second-largest pre-Thanksgiving Wednesday among all films,
behind _Catching Fire_ ($20.8 million). The film finished in second place over
the traditional three-day weekend (Friday-to-Sunday) with $67.4 million,
setting an opening weekend record among Walt Disney Animation Studios
films.[225] It also scored the second-largest opening weekend among films that
did not debut at #1.[226][227] Female audiences accounted for 57% of _Frozen_
's total audiences on the first weekend, while family audiences held a
proportion of 81%.[227][228] Among films that opened during Thanksgiving, it
set new records; three-day ($67.4 million from Friday to Sunday)[229] and
five-day ($93.6 million from Wednesday to Sunday).[230] It also achieved the
second-largest three-day[231] and five-day[232] Thanksgiving gross among all
films, behind _Catching Fire_.[233]

During its second weekend of wide release, _Frozen_ declined 53% to $31.6
million, but jumped to first place, setting a record for the largest post-
Thanksgiving weekend, ahead of _Toy Story 2_ ($27.8 million).[234] _Frozen_
became the first film since _Avatar_ to reach first place in its sixth weekend
of wide release.[235] It remained in the top 10 at the box office for sixteen
consecutive weekends[236][237] (the longest run by any film since 2002[212])
and achieved large weekend grosses from its fifth[238] to its twelfth weekend
(of wide release), compared to other films in their respective weekends.[239]
On April 25, 2014, _Frozen_ became the nineteenth film to gross $400 million
in North America and the fifteenth to do so without a major re-release.[240]

In North America, _Frozen_ is the twenty-sixth-highest-grossing film,[241] the
third-highest-grossing 2013 film,[242] the fifth-highest-grossing animated
film,[243] the highest-grossing 2013 animated film, the twelfth-highest-
grossing 3-D film,[244] and the second-highest-grossing Walt Disney Animation
Studios film.[245] Excluding re-releases, it has the highest-grossing initial
run among non-sequel animated films (a record previously held by _Finding
Nemo_ )[246][247] and among Walt Disney Animation Studios films (a record
previously held by _The Lion King_ ).[248] Box Office Mojo estimates that the
film sold over 49 million tickets in North America.[249]

_Frozen_ is the ninth-highest-grossing film,[250] the highest-grossing
animated film,[250][251] and the highest-grossing 2013 film.[252] It is the
highest-grossing animated film in South Korea, Denmark, and
Venezuela.[253][254][255] It is also the highest-grossing Walt Disney
Animation Studios film in more than 45 territories,[247] including the Latin
America region (specifically in Mexico and Brazil), the UK, Ireland, and
Malta, Russia and the CIS, Ukraine, Norway, Malaysia, Singapore, Australia and
China.[256][257][258][259]

The film made its debut outside North America on the same weekend as its wide
North American release and earned $16.7 million from sixteen markets.[227] It
topped the box office outside North America for two weekends in 2014; January
10–12 ($27.8 million)[260] and February 7–9 ($24 million).[261] Overall, its
largest opening weekends occurred in China (five-day opening of $14.3
million),[262] Russia and the CIS ($11.9 million, including previews from
previous weekend), where the film set an opening weekend record among Disney
animated films (ahead of _Tangled_ ),[263] and Japan (three-day opening of
$9.73 million).[264][265] It set an opening weekend record among animated
films in Sweden.[266] In total earnings, the film's top market after North
America is Japan ($247.6 million), followed by South Korea ($76.6 million) and
the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta ($65.7 million).[267][268] In South
Korea, _Frozen_ is the second-largest foreign film both in terms of attendance
and gross,[269] the largest Disney release[212] and the first animated film to
earn more than ten million admissions.[270] In Japan, it is the third-highest-
grossing film of all time, the second-highest-grossing imported film (behind
_Titanic_ ) and the highest-grossing Disney film.[271] It topped the country's
box office for sixteen consecutive weekends[267] until being surpassed by
another Disney release, _Maleficent_.[272]

Ray Subers, writing for Box Office Mojo, compared the film to Disney's 2010
animated feature _Tangled_ by saying that the film's story was not as
"immediately interesting" and that "marketing has yet to sell this to boys the
way _Tangled_ did".[273] Noting that the 2013 holiday season (Thanksgiving and
Christmas) lacked compelling content for families, Subers predicted that the
film would "play well all the way through Christmas" and end up grossing $185
million in North America (similar to _Wreck-It Ralph_ ).[273] _Boxoffice_
noted the success of previous Disney's animated films released during the
holiday season ( _Tangled_ and _Wreck-It Ralph_ ), but argued that the cast
might not attract audiences due to the lack of major stars.[274] They issued a
$170,000,000 North America box office forecast for the film.[274] Chris Agar
from _ScreenRant_ expressed a similar opinion; he cited a string of recent box
office successes of the studio, and thought that _Frozen_ would fill a void of
kid-friendly films in the marketplace, but did not expect it to surpass
_Catching Fire_ in terms of box office gross.[275]

Clayton Dillard of _Slant Magazine_ commented that while the trailers made the
film seem "pallid," positive critical reviews could attract interest from both
"core demographics" and adult audiences, and therefore he believed _Frozen_
stood a good chance of surpassing _Tangled_ 's Thanksgiving three-day opening
record.[276] Brad Brevet of _Ropeofsilicon.com_ described the film's marketing
as a "severely hit and miss" campaign, which could affect its box office
performance.[277] After _Frozen_ finished its first weekend with a record
$93.6 million during Thanksgiving, most box-office watchers predicted that it
would end up grossing between $250 and $300 million in North America.[278] At
the time, _Box Office Mojo_ reissued a $250 million box office gross
prediction for North America.[227] _Box Office Mojo_ noted that it would be
"the exclusive choice for family audiences" and attributed its successful
opening to strong word-of-mouth and the studio's marketing, which highlighted
the connection between _Frozen_ and Disney's previous successful releases like
_Tangled_ and _Wreck-It Ralph_ , as well as the elements of humor.[227]

When _Frozen_ became a box office success, Bilge Ebiri of _Vulture_ analyzed
the film's elements and suggested eight factors that might have led to its
success. He thought _Frozen_ managed to capture the spirit of the Disney
Renaissance films and early Disney features such as _Snow White and the Seven
Dwarfs_ and _Cinderella_.[278] He also wrote that the film has Olaf, a
"wisecracking, irreverent" sidekick with mild humor which is "a requirement of
modern animated kids' movies," and its "witty, catchy" songs were "pretty
good."[278] Furthermore, Ebiri noted that _Frozen_ was a "revisionist" film
that didn't "have a typical villain"; Elsa, the person who should be the
villain didn't turn out to be a villain, but "a girl who's having trouble."
She was the one who "[created] most of the challenges [for] the film's more
typical heroes – Princess Anna."[278] The story of two sisters who were
separated as they grew up held real-life overtones for many audience members
who had siblings, and the struggle of Elsa to overcome the shame and fear of
her powers was also relatable.[278] Finally, he identified several factors
which he believed attracted female audiences: two strong female characters; a
twist on the usual romantic subplot, when the traditional "Prince Charming" –
Hans – turned out to be a gold-digging villain; and the "act of true love"
which saved Anna was her own sacrifice in saving Elsa.[278]

Scott Davis of _Forbes_ credited the film's commercial success to its
marketing aimed at both sexes, and to the success of its soundtrack.[279]

The commercial success of _Frozen_ in Japan was considered to be a
phenomenon[57] which received widespread media coverage. Released in that
market as _Anna and the Snow Queen_ ,[280][281] the film increased its gross
each week in its three first weeks of release, and only started to drop in the
fourth; while other films usually peak in the opening week and decline in the
latter ones.[282] _Frozen_ has received over 7 million admissions in Japan as
of April 16,[280] and nearly 18.7 million admissions as of June 23.[283] Many
cinemagoers were reported to have watched both the original and the Japanese-
dubbed version.[281] _Japan Today_ also reported that the local dubbed version
was "particularly popular" in the country.[280] Gavin J. Blair of _The
Hollywood Reporter_ commented on the film's earnings in Japan: "Even after its
$9.6 million (￥986.4 million) three-day opening, a record bow for a Disney
animation in Japan, few would have predicted the kind of numbers _Frozen_ has
now racked up."[283] Disney's head of distribution Dave Hollis said in an
interview that "It's become very clear that the themes and emotions of
_Frozen_ transcend geography, but what's going on in Japan is
extraordinary."[284][285]

" _Frozen_ 's success doesn't benefit from a general appetite for American
films in Japan" (as reported by the _International Business Times_ ),[286] but
according to Akira Lippit of the USC School of Cinematic Arts, there were
several factors that constituted this phenomenon: besides the fact that
animated films "are held in great regard in Japan, and the Disney brand name
with all of its heritage is extremely valuable", "the biggest reason is the
primary audience ... 13- to 17-year-old teenage girls."[284] He further
explained that audiences of this age range have a vital role in shaping
Japanese pop culture and " _Frozen_ has so many elements that appeal to them,
with its story of a young girl with power and mystique, who finds her own sort
of good in herself."[284] He compared the film's current situation with a
similar phenomenon which occurred with _Titanic_ in 1997, "when millions of
Japanese teen girls turned out to watch Leonard[o] DiCaprio go under – several
times," and thought the same would happen with _Frozen_.[284] Another reason
that contributed to the film's success in the market was that Disney took
great care in choosing "high quality"[286] voice actors for the Japanese-
dubbed version, since Japan's pop music scene had an important role
particularly with teenage audiences.[284] Orika Hiromura, Disney Japan's
marketing project leader for _Frozen_ , said in an interview with _The Wall
Street Journal_ : "We really put effort into finding actors who could not only
play the role but also belt out the tunes as well. We found the perfect match
in Takako Matsu and Sayaka Kanda, and they really added a whole new dimension
to the storytelling."[168]

When asked about the success of _Frozen_ , director Chris Buck stated: "We
never expected anything like this. We just hoped to make a movie that did as
well as _Tangled_! I hoped the audience would embrace it and respond to it,
but there's no way we could have predicted this."[57] He cited a number of
reasons for the film's popularity: "There are characters that people relate
to; the songs are so strong and memorable. We also have some flawed
characters, which is what Jen[nifer Lee] and I like to do – we essentially
create two imperfect princesses."[57] As _Frozen_ approached the first
anniversary of its release, Menzel mentioned the film's continuing popularity
in an October 2014 interview: "It's just a remarkable thing. Usually you do a
project and it has its moment. This just feels like it keeps going."[287]

_Frozen_ opened to positive reviews,[9] with several critics comparing it
favorably to the films of the Disney Renaissance, particularly _The Little
Mermaid_ , _Beauty and the Beast_ , _Aladdin_ , and _The Lion
King_.[40][288][289][290] Some journalists felt that the film's success marked
a second Disney Renaissance.[291][292] The film was praised for its visuals,
themes, musical numbers, screenplay, and vocal performances, especially those
of Bell, Menzel, and Gad.[293] The "Let It Go" musical sequence was also
particularly praised by critics.[294][295][296] The review aggregation website
Rotten Tomatoes reports that 90% of critics gave the film a positive review
based on 237 reviews, with an average rating of 7.68/10. The site's critical
consensus reads: "Beautifully animated, smartly written, and stocked with
singalong songs, _Frozen_ adds another worthy entry to the Disney canon."[297]
Metacritic, which determines a rating out of 100 from the reviews of
mainstream critics, calculated a score of 74 based on 43 reviews, indicating
"generally favorable reviews."[298] CinemaScore gave _Frozen_ an "A+" on an A+
to F scale, based on polls conducted during the opening weekend.[228][299]
Surveys conducted by _Fandango_ among 1,000 ticket buyers revealed that 75% of
purchasers had seen the film at least once, and 52% had seen it twice. It was
also pointed out that 55% of audiences identified "Let It Go" as their
favorite song, while "Do You Want to Build a Snowman?" and "For the First Time
in Forever" held proportions of 21% and 9%, respectively.[167] _Frozen_ was
named the seventh-best film of 2013 by Richard Corliss of _Time_[300] and Kyle
Smith of the _New York Post_.[301]

Alonso Duralde of _TheWrap_ wrote that the film is "the best animated musical
to come out of Disney since the tragic death of lyricist Howard Ashman, whose
work on _The Little Mermaid_ and _Beauty and the Beast_ helped build the
studio's modern animated division into what it is today." He also said that
"while it lags the tiniest bit on its way to the conclusion, the script...
really delivers; it offers characters to care about, along with some nifty
twists and surprises along the way."[40] Todd McCarthy of _The Hollywood
Reporter_ observed _Frozen_ as a true musical and wrote, "You can practically
see the Broadway musical _Frozen_ is destined to become while watching
Disney's 3D animated princess tale." McCarthy described the film as
"energetic, humorous and not too cloying, as well as the first Hollywood film
in many years to warn of global cooling rather than warming, this tuneful toon
upgrades what has been a lackluster year for big studio animated fare and,
beginning with its Thanksgiving opening, should live up to box office
expectations as one of the studio's hoped-for holiday-spanning
blockbusters."[302] Kyle Smith of the _New York Post_ awarded the film 3.5 out
of 4 stars and praised the film as "a great big snowy pleasure with an
emotionally gripping core, brilliant Broadway-style songs and a crafty plot.
Its first and third acts are better than the jokey middle, but this is the
rare example of a Walt Disney Animation Studios effort that reaches as deep as
a Pixar film."[303] Scott Mendelson of _Forbes_ wrote, " _Frozen_ is both a
declaration of Disney's renewed cultural relevance and a reaffirmation of
Disney coming to terms with its own legacy and its own identity. It's also a
just plain terrific bit of family entertainment."[304]

The _Los Angeles Times_ extolled the film's ensemble voice talent and
elaborate musical sequences, and declared _Frozen_ was "a welcome return to
greatness for Walt Disney Animation Studios."[288] _Entertainment Weekly_ 's
Owen Gleiberman gave the film a "B+" grade and labeled it as a "squarely
enchanting fairy tale that shows you how the definition of what's fresh in
animation can shift."[289] Richard Corliss of _Time_ stated that: "It's great
to see Disney returning to its roots and blooming anew: creating superior
musical entertainment that draws on the Walt [Disney] tradition of animation
splendor and the verve of Broadway present."[305] Richard Roeper wrote that
the film was an "absolute delight from start to finish."[306] Both Michael
Phillips of _Chicago Tribune_ and Stephen Holden of _The New York Times_
praised the film's characters and musical sequences, which also drew
comparisons to the theatrics found in _Wicked_.[307][308] Emma Dibdin of
Digital Spy awarded the film five out of five stars and called the film "a new
Disney classic" and "an exhilarating, joyous, human story that's as frequently
laugh-out-loud funny as it is startling and daring and poignant. Hot on the
heels of the 90th anniversary, it's impossible to imagine a more perfect
celebration of everything Disney is at its best."[309] _Frozen_ was also
praised in Norwegian Sámi media as showcasing Sámi culture to a broad audience
in a good way. Composer Frode Fjellheim was lauded by Norwegian Sámi President
Aili Keskitalo for his contributions to the film, during the President's 2014
New Year's speech.[310][311]

Scott Foundas of _Variety_ was less impressed with the film, describing it as
"formulaic", though he praised its voice acting and technical artistry: "The
tactile, snow-capped Arendelle landscape, including Elsa's ice-castle retreat
is _Frozen_ 's other true marvel, enhanced by 3D and the decision to shoot in
widescreen – a nod to the CinemaScope richness of _Sleeping Beauty_ and _Lady
and the Tramp_... That's almost but not quite enough to make up for the
somewhat slack plotting and the generic nature of the main characters. Neither
princess here is a patch on _Tangled_ 's babe-in-the-woods Rapunzel, while
both Hans and Kristoff are cut from pretty standard-issue hero cloth until a
reasonably surprising third-act twist somewhat ups the ante. Only Olaf is
unimpeachable: Get this snowman a spinoff feature to call his own."[312] _The
Seattle Times_ gave the film two out of four stars, stating that "While it is
an often gorgeous film with computer-generated fjords and ice sculptures and
castle interiors, the important thing that glues all this stuff together –
story – is sadly lacking."[313] Joe Williams of the _St. Louis Post-Dispatch_
also criticized the story as the film's weakest point.[314] Writing on Roger
Ebert's website, Christy Lemire gave a mixed review in which she awarded two-
and-a-half stars out of four.[315] Lemire praised the visuals and the
performance of "Let It Go," as well as the positive messages _Frozen_
sends.[315] However, she referred to the film as "cynical" and criticized it
as an "attempt to shake things up without shaking them up too much."[315] She
also noted the similarity between Elsa and another well-known fictional female
who unleashes paranormal powers when agitated, Carrie White.[315]

Allegations of sexism occurred following a statement by Lino DiSalvo, the
film's head of animation, who said to Fan Voice's Jenna Busch: "Historically
speaking, animating female characters are really, really difficult, because
they have to go through these range of emotions, but you have to keep them
pretty."[316][317][318] However, a Disney spokesperson later told _Time_ that
DiSalvo's quote was widely misinterpreted, stating that he was "describing
some technical aspects of CG animation and not making a general comment on
animating females versus males or other characters."[316][318] Director Lee
also said that DiSalvo's words were recklessly taken out of context, and that
he was talking in very technical terms about CG animation. "It is hard no
matter what the gender is. I felt horrible for him," she said.[319] In an
August 2014 interview, DiSalvo re-emphasized what he had been trying to
explain all along when his statements were taken out of context – the
difficulty with turning _any_ kind of animated character from a series of
sketches on a 2D emotion model sheet into a properly rigged 3D character
model: "Translating that emotional range onto a CG character is one of the
most difficult parts of the process. Male. Female. Snowman. Animal."[320] He
added, "The really sad thing is people took that ... catchy headline and they
just repopulated it everywhere. People didn't get back to me for comments and
the sad thing is that's the way the internet works. They don't want the
truth."[320]

Several viewers outside the film industry, such as evangelical
pastors[321][322][323] and commentators,[324] argued that _Frozen_ promotes
normalization of homosexuality, while others believed that the main character,
Elsa, represents a positive image of LGBT youth, viewing the film and the song
"Let It Go" as a metaphor for coming out.[325][326] These claims were met with
mixed reactions from both audiences and the LGBT community.[325] Writing for
_Film International_ , Robert Geal has argued that while the film offers a
superficially progressive vision of homosexuality, it perpetuates conservative
notions about sexuality and gender; whereas Elsa's female homosexuality is
rendered visually pleasurable to a male gaze, male transgressions of
heterosexuality are coded in various negative ways.[327] When asked about
perceptions of a homosexual undertone in the film, Lee said, "We know what we
made. But at the same time I feel like once we hand the film over, it belongs
to the world, so I don't like to say anything, and let the fans talk. I think
it's up to them."[328] She also mentioned that Disney films were made in
different eras and were all celebrated for different reasons, but a 2013 film
would have a "2013 point of view".[326][329]

On November 24, 2017, musical artist Jaime Ciero sued Demi Lovato, Idina
Menzel, Walt Disney Animation Studios and others involved with the song "Let
it Go," accusing them of ripping off his 2008 single "Volar."[330] In May
2018, it was ruled in court that the original songwriters, Bobby Lopez and
Kristen Anderson-Lopez, would be released from the lawsuit due to the 3-year
statute of limitations for copyright claims. Because each replay or new
performance of the song restarts the statute of limitations clock, Ciero was
told he could amend his original complaint to address only those infringements
within the 3 year timeframe.[331]

_Frozen_ was nominated for various awards and won a number of them, including
several for Best Animated Feature. The song "Let It Go" was particularly
praised. The film was nominated for two Golden Globes at the 71st Golden Globe
Awards and won for Best Animated Feature, becoming the first Walt Disney
Animation Studios film to win in this category.[13] It also won two Academy
Awards for Best Animated Feature and Best Original Song ("Let It Go"),[12] the
BAFTA Award for Best Animated Film at the British Academy Film Awards
(BAFTA),[14] five Annie Awards (including Best Animated Feature),[15][332] and
two Critics' Choice Awards for Best Animated Feature and Best Original Song
("Let It Go").[17] It received other similar nominations at the Satellite
Awards,[333] and various critics' groups and circles. At the 57th Annual
Grammy Awards, the _Frozen_ soundtrack won the Grammy Award for Best
Compilation Soundtrack For Visual Media and was nominated for Best Score
Soundtrack For Visual Media (with credits going to Christophe Beck as
composer); the song "Let It Go" won the award for Best Song Written For Visual
Media, with credits going to Kristen Anderson-Lopez and Robert Lopez as
songwriters and Idina Menzel as performer.[16][334][335][336]

During the spring and summer of 2014, several journalists observed that
_Frozen_ was unusually catchy in comparison to the vast majority of films, in
that many children in both the U.S.[337][338][339][340] and the
UK[341][342][343][344] were watching _Frozen_ so many times that they now knew
all the songs by heart and kept singing them again and again at every
opportunity, to the distress of their hapless parents, teachers, and
classmates. Those who have disclosed that they are the parent of a _Frozen_
-obsessed child include former UK prime minister David Cameron,[345] as well
as actors Amy Adams,[346] Ben Affleck,[347] Kevin Costner,[348] and Vince
Vaughn.[349] When Terry Gross brought up this phenomenon with songwriters
Lopez and Anderson-Lopez in an April 2014 interview on NPR, they explained
there was simply no way they could have known how popular their work on
_Frozen_ would become.[350] They were "just trying to tell a story that
resonated" and "that didn't suck."[350]

In May, columnist Joel Stein of _Time_ magazine wrote about his young son
Laszlo's frustration with the inescapable "cultural assault" of _Frozen_ at
preschool and all social and extracurricular activities, and how he had
arranged for a Skype call with lead actress Bell after Laszlo began asking why
the film was made.[351] When Laszlo asked whether Bell knew when she made
_Frozen_ that it would take over kids' lives, she replied: "I did not know
that people would not let it go. No pun intended."[351] In a December 2014
interview with _The Hollywood Reporter_ , Lee acknowledged that she had
transitioned from thanking people when they expressed their appreciation for
_Frozen_ to having to apologize when they said "we're still listening to those
songs" (with their children).[352][353][354] Lee also said that she used the
film and its strong female characters to inspire her own daughter, who had
experienced bullying at school, and admitted that she herself as a child was
bullied as well;[352] thus, they had managed to be true to themselves like
Anna and Elsa.[352]

In a 2014 mid-year report of the 100 most-used baby names conducted by
BabyCenter, _Elsa_ was ranked 88; it was the first time the name had appeared
on the site's chart.[355] Sarah Barrett, managing director of the site,
explained that while the film's popular heroine is called Anna, "Elsa offers a
more unique name and is also a strong female role model."[356] Many parents
revealed that their choices of name were "heavily influenced" by the siblings.
Vice president of Disney UK Anna Hill later commented that "We're delighted
that Elsa is a popular name for babies and it's lovely to hear that for many
families, it is actually their siblings who have chosen it," and that "Elsa's
fight to overcome her fears and the powerful strength of the family bond" were
relatable to many families.[356] On 2014 year-end lists issued by Google,
_Frozen_ was the most searched movie of 2014.[357][358] On the Google Play
Store, _Frozen_ and its soundtrack album were also named _Movie of the Year_
and _Album of the Year_ respectively, i.e. the best-selling title in their
respective areas.[359] _Frozen_ was also the second-most illegally downloaded
film title of 2014 via BitTorrent file sharing protocol, with around 30
million downloads.[360][361]

After Disney announced in March 2015 that a feature-length sequel was in
development, Agence France-Presse and the _Toronto Star_ both published
stories gently mocking the horror of parents everywhere at the news that
another _Frozen_ "sensory and financial assault" was in the
pipeline.[362][363]

In January 2014, Iger announced that _Frozen_ would be adapted into a Broadway
stage musical.[364][365][366] In the space of a single business quarter, Iger
went from speaking of _Frozen_ 's "franchise potential" (in February
2014)[367]:8,13 to saying that it was "probably" one of Disney's "top five
franchises" (in May 2014).[368][369] The film's massive popularity resulted in
an unusually severe merchandise shortage in the United
States[370][371][372][373][374] and several other industrialized countries in
April 2014,[375][376][377][378][379][380][381][382] which caused resale prices
for higher-quality limited-edition _Frozen_ dolls and costumes to skyrocket
past $1,000 on eBay.[372][373] By the time the merchandise shortage was
finally resolved in early November 2014 (nearly a year after the film's
release),[383] Disney had sold over three million _Frozen_ costumes in North
America alone.[384] Wait times for the meet-and-greets at Disney Parks soon
regularly exceeded four hours and forced management in February 2014 to
indefinitely extend what was originally intended as a temporary film
promotion.[163][370] Disney Parks later put on a temporary event ( _Frozen
Summer Fun_ ) at Disney's Hollywood Studios,[385] then announced on September
12, 2014, that the Maelstrom ride at Epcot's Norway pavilion would be closed
and replaced with a _Frozen_ -based attraction, which opened in early
2016.[386][387] On May 27, 2016, a live _Frozen_ musical stage show officially
opened at the Hyperion Theater in Disney California Adventure, replacing the
venue's previous show, _Aladdin_.[388] By August 2014, the publisher Random
House had sold over 8 million _Frozen_ -related books.[389] Tour operators,
including Adventures by Disney, added more Norway tours in response to rising
demand during 2014.[390][391]

Meanwhile, the producers of _Once Upon a Time_ (made by Disney-owned ABC
Studios) independently conceived of and obtained authorization from both ABC
and Disney for a _Frozen_ -inspired crossover story arc in the show's fourth
season, which was first revealed at the end of the show's third season in May
2014, which was broadcast in fall 2014.[392][393][394] On September 2, 2014,
ABC broadcast _The Story of Frozen: Making a Disney Animated Classic_ , a one-
hour "making of" television special.[395][396][397] At the end of the special,
Lasseter announced that the production team would be reuniting to make _Frozen
Fever_ , a short film which debuted in theaters with Disney's _Cinderella_ on
March 13, 2015.[398][399][400][401] On September 4, 2014, Feld Entertainment's
Disney on Ice presented the world premiere of a touring ice skating show based
on the film at Amway Center in Orlando, Florida.[402][403]

During the airing of _The Making of Frozen: Return to Arendelle_ on ABC, it
was announced that a holiday special titled _Olaf's Frozen Adventure_ was in-
production, slated for release in winter 2017. It was later revealed by John
Lasseter in June 2017 that the 21-minute special would instead receive a
limited time[404] theatrical release. It premiered in theaters with Pixar's
_Coco_ on November 22, 2017,[405] and made its television debut on ABC on
December 14, 2017.[406]

In addition, the movie was adapted into a world in Kingdom Hearts III, with
the plot of the world (titled Arendelle) following the plot of the movie.

On March 12, 2015, Disney officially announced that a feature-length sequel to
_Frozen_ was in development with Buck and Lee returning as directors, and Del
Vecho returning as producer.[19] In a May 2015 interview, Buck said, "We have
lots of things to figure out but at least we know where we are going."[407] In
March 2016, Bell stated that voice recording for the film was due to start
later in the month,[408] but in September of that same year, she retracted her
earlier comments as mistaken and explained that she had been working instead
on other _Frozen_ projects such as the upcoming holiday special.[409] In April
2017, Disney announced that _Frozen 2_ would be released on November 27,
2019.[19][20] In July 2018, Evan Rachel Wood and Sterling K. Brown were
revealed to be in talks to join _Frozen 2_ , while it was confirmed that Bell,
Menzel, and Gad will reprise their roles in the sequel.[410]

In early 2018, discussions from within Disney Studios were publicized which
centered on Elsa's possible development as a lesbian in _Frozen
2_.[411][412][413] In fall 2018, it was announced that the release date was
moved to November 22, 2019.[21]

