**2nd Avenue** (capitalized as **2ND AVENUE** ) was a Philippine free-to-air
television network owned by Solar Entertainment Corporation, and formerly
broadcasts on free-to-air television under a blocktime agreement with Rajah
Broadcasting Network via flagship station DZRJ-TV Channel 29.

2nd Avenue broadcasts through Solar's master control, studios and offices
located at the Third Floor Worldwide Corporate Center, Shaw Boulevard corner
Epifanio de los Santos Avenue in Mandaluyong City, with RJTV-produced programs
produced at RJTV's Venture's I Building in Makati City. RJTV holds free TV
transmissions from their tower located at Nuestra Se√±ora de la Paz
Subdivision, Bo. Sta. Cruz, Antipolo City, province of Rizal. It formerly
operates daily from 6 AM to 1 AM on analog free television (now defunct),
while operating 24 hours on digital free TV, cable, satellite and internet
live streaming until the end of June 2018.

Initially launched as a spin-off channel to ETC, ETC 2nd Avenue started as a
test broadcast on December 15, 2005, and had its full launch in 2006. The
channel was later renamed to 2nd Avenue on January 17, 2007.

In 2008, as part of its parent company's blocktime agreements with multiple
terrestrial channels, 2nd Avenue made its debut on RJTV stations nationwide.
RJTV's _RJ Sunday Jam_ and _Thank God, It's RJ_ were retained and integrated
to 2nd Avenue's programming.[1]

On June 5, 2018, 2nd Avenue ceased its broadcast after more than 12 years on
Pay TV and a decade of blocktime agreement with RJTV 29 due to low ratings as
well as cost cutting measures by Solar Entertainment Corporation. Other
provincial cable entities will still carry 2nd Avenue's broadcast, with the
airing of marathons of some of the programs until June 30, 2018 at 2:00 AM.

Many programs from this channel transferred to ETC and Jack TV starting June
6, 2018.

As a general entertainment channel, 2nd Avenue's programming consists of drama
series, lifestyle, entertainment news programs, talk shows, sitcoms, reality
shows, movies, and infomercials.

