**2 Sisters Food Group** is a privately owned food manufacturing company based
in Birmingham, England.

Established under a misleading name (the company was never owned by two
sisters) in 1993 by entrepreneur Ranjit Singh Boparan, as a frozen retail
poultry cutting operation, it has grown rapidly through acquisition and
expanded to cover 36 manufacturing sites in the UK, six in the Netherlands,
one in Ireland and one in Poland.

Primarily a private label manufacturer for retailer and food service markets,
the acquisition of Northern Foods in 2011 gave the Group ownership of brands
including Fox's Biscuits, Goodfella's Pizza, Holland's Pies, and Matthew
Walker Christmas Puddings.

It is the largest food company in the UK by turnover.[2]

The group employs 23,000 people, with annual sales of £3.28 billion. It is
listed 9th on the 2017 _Sunday Times_ Top Track 100.

On 6 December 2017, the Group announced its full year results (52 weeks ending
27 July 2017). Sales were £3.28bn, with like-for-like operating profit of
£64.5m. The Group reported profit after exceptional items, before interest and
tax of £22.8m, against £63.4m profit the previous year. However, after
exceptional items, interest and tax, losses for the year stood at £37.7m,
against a loss of £1.4m the previous year. LTM EBITDA for the year was
£161.2m[3]

In December 2013, the company was ranked as Britain's 4th Most Admired Company
(food producers sector) in the _Management Today_ Most Admired Company list,
voted for by its industry peers.

In January 2018, 2 Sisters reached agreement with Nomad Foods on the sale of
its Goodfellas Pizza brand for £200m.[4]

**November 2000** – sites at Scunthorpe and Flixton were acquired. These were
significant acquisitions as it meant the group would move from a poultry meat
cutting operation to a primary producer.[5]

**September 2005** -the group purchased Haughley Park near Stowmarket,
allowing the business to manufacture cooked and breaded poultry.[6]

**June 2007** – the group made four acquisitions – including Joseph Mitchell
(Letham) of Forfar; Challenger Foods of Sunderland, where 400,000 chicken
fillets per week are prepared for sandwich and pizza market; and the Tulip
facility in Morecambe.[7]

**January 2008** – the group bought Devon poultry firm Lloyd Maunder. The
firm, based in Willand in mid-Devon, was bought for an undisclosed sum.

**April 2010** – the group announced the agreed acquisition of Dutch-based
chicken processor Storteboom Group, with facilities in the Netherlands and
Poland.[8]

**January 2011** – the group announced it was to buy Northern Foods PLC in a
deal worth £342m.[9]

**December 2011** – Premier Foods sold its Brookes Avana business, combining
RF Brookes chilled foods and Avana Bakeries, to 2 Sisters for £30m.

**March 2013** – the group announced the acquisition of the UK arm of Dutch
poultry and red meat company VION. The acquisition helped to meet growing
demand from 2 Sisters' poultry customers and further diversifies the company's
offering to include red meat, supporting 2 Sisters' strategy of serving more
meal occasions.

The acquisition followed the announcement by VION's Dutch parent company on 19
November 2012 of its plan to exit its UK operations.[10]

**June 2013** – the VION acquisition was granted unconditional clearance by
the Office of Fair Trading (OFT).[11][12]

**August 2014** – The business announced it was selling its Avana Bakeries
cake business in Newport and its salads business Solway Foods in Corby,
Northamptonshire.

**January 2018** – The business announced it was selling its Goodfellas pizza
business to Nomad Foods.

**February 2018** – Ranjit Singh Boparan announced he was stepping up into the
role of President of parent company Boparan Holdings Limited.

**May 2018** – Ronald Kers was appointed CEO of 2 Sisters Food Group.

In December 2014, the business signed a major contract with Liverpool-based H2
Energy for the installation of bio-refineries at ten 2 Sisters factories to
convert product waste into energy. The company claims the deal – which will
eventually encompass all its manufacturing sites in the UK – will deliver
35,000 tonnes of carbon savings, 20,000 fewer lorry journeys a year and a
significant electric and thermal energy boost, reducing its non-transport
carbon footprint by 10%.[13]

In August 2014, an undercover investigation into high levels of the food
poisoning bacteria campylobacter in food in the UK allegedly showed raw
chicken, contaminated by being dropped on the factory floor, being returned to
the production line at one factory. The company strongly disputed this claim,
pointing out the footage did not prove the chicken entered the human food
chain. The Food Standards Agency initially cleared the factory of any
wrongdoing but then admitted a breach of regulations had occurred though the
company was not fined.[14]

In November 2014, 2 Sisters claimed to have launched the most comprehensive
programme in the poultry industry to reduce campylobacter levels. The
initiative, claimed to be costing £10m, would encompass the entire supply
chain from farm through to consumer, using a variety of interventions
including blast surface chilling and 'no touch' packaging.[15]

In September 2017, an undercover investigation filmed workers allegedly
changing the slaughter dates – and hence the sell-by dates – at a 2 Sisters
plant in West Bromwich. The company strenuously denied the
allegations.[16][17] Within days, management at the plant decided to suspend
production.[18] The subsequent Food Standards Agency investigation report,
published 2 March 2018, cleared the business of any serious non-
compliances.[19] The CEO of the FSA, Jason Feeney, said: "Our investigation
found some areas for improvement but the issues were resolved promptly by the
company, who co-operated fully, and at no point did we find it necessary to
take formal enforcement action"[20]

