**The 5 Network** or simply as **5** , (formerly known as **ABC 5** and
**TV5** ) is a Philippine free-to-air television network based in Mandaluyong
City. It is the flagship property of TV5 Network, Inc., which is owned by
MediaQuest Holdings, the multimedia arm of Philippine-based telecommunications
company PLDT. 5 is also formally referred to as "The _Kapatid_ Network", a
Tagalog term for "sibling", which was introduced in 2010.

Named after its flagship station in Metro Manila, DWET-TV, which are carried
in VHF Channel 5 (analog broadcast) and UHF Channel 51 (digital test
broadcast; though the latter is licensed to TV5's sister company
Mediascape/Cignal TV) with channel 18 served as a permanent assigned digital
frequency. 5 is also broadcasting to 7 other owned-and-operated stations, and
19 affiliated television stations nationwide. Its programming is also
available outside the Philippines through Kapatid Channel and AksyonTV
International.

Joaquin "Chino" Roces, owner of the Manila Times was granted of a radio-TV
franchise from Congress under Republic Act 2945 on March 1, 1960. He then
founded the Associated Broadcasting Corporation with its first studios along
Pasong Tamo, becoming the fourth television network established in the
country. ABC operated radio and television services from 1960 until September
23, 1972 when President Ferdinand E. Marcos declared Martial Law. Both ABC and
the Manila Times were forcibly shut down as a result with rivals ABS-CBN, RBS,
and MBC's radio and television broadcasts also shut down by martial law that
day.

After the People Power Revolution in 1986, Chino Roces made a successful
representation with President Corazon Cojuangco-Aquino for the network's
reinstatement. ABC's rival ABS-CBN reopened that year but ABC was not yet
reopened until it made a test broadcast in 1991 and finally reopened in 1992.
Chino Roces died in 1988, but his son Edgardo Roces would reopen the network
after.

New stockholders led by broadcast veteran Edward Tan and Chino Roces's son
Edgardo then began the arduous task of resuming broadcasts. The Securities and
Exchange Commission granted their application for an increase in
capitalization and amendments to ABCâ€™s articles of incorporation and by-laws.
They were subsequently granted a permit to operate by the National
Telecommunications Commission (NTC).

ABC inaugurated its studio complex and transmitter tower in San Bartolome,
Novaliches, Quezon City in 1990 and began test broadcasts by the end of 1991;
officially and finally returning to the air as the Associated Broadcasting
Company on February 21, 1992 with the different callsign of the flagship
station, DWET-TV and the corporate name, Associated Broadcasting Company,
which the Company uses C as the corporate initial by instead of keeping
Corporation, the name of original ABC, along its original calls, DZTM-TV
during the pre-martial law years as a result of the new management took over
upon the revival of the network.

ABC acquired a new franchise to operate on December 9, 1994, under Republic
Act 7831 signed by President Fidel V. Ramos. In the same year, it went on
nationwide satellite broadcasting. In a surge of phenomenal growth, ABC earned
its reputation as "The Fastest Growing Network" under new network executive
Tina Monzon-Palma who served as Chief Operating Officer.

In 2001, ABC began to produce local versions of _The Price Is Right_ (hosted
by Dawn Zulueta and later acquired by ABS-CBN); _Wheel of Fortune_ (hosted by
Rustom Padilla, later acquired by ABS-CBN); and _Family Feud_ (hosted by Ogie
Alcasid, later acquired by GMA Network and then by ABS-CBN). This was during
the height of the game show frenzy within Philippine networks brought on by
the success of IBC's Philippine editions of _Who Wants to Be a Millionaire?_
(hosted by Christopher de Leon, which is now home of TV5 at present time
hosted by Vic Sotto) and _The Weakest Link_ (hosted by Edu Manzano).

In October 2003, ABC was acquired by a group led by businessman Antonio
"Tonyboy" O. Cojuangco, Jr. former Chairman of the Philippine Long Distance
Telephone Company (PLDT) and owner of Dream Satellite Broadcasting and Bank of
Commerce, among other assets. Cojuangco was the chairman and CEO of ABC at the
time. The new management introduced many changes including a stronger news and
public affairs division, modernization of its broadcast equipment, and the
acquisition of broadcast rights of Philippine Basketball Association games.
Additionally, the network also launched a new advertising campaign and slogan,
"Iba Tayo!" ("We're Different!"), which emphasized the new lineup as being
more distinct and new than what was being aired by its competitors at the
time, targeting the burgeoning middle- to upper-class youth market.[2]

In 2005, ABC won the "Outstanding TV Station" award at the 2005 KBP Golden
Dove Awards, with several other programs on the network also earning awards in
their respective categories.

Until the end of 2006, ABC was a member of the Family Rosary Crusade. Its
religious pre-identification campaign "Please Pray the Rosary" was played
before every program on the network until it was stopped airing due to the
network's revamp in 2004.

In early 2007, ABC implemented a series of budget cuts, primarily directed
towards its news department, which laid off most of its employees. The cuts,
held prior to the 2007 general elections, left ABC almost incapable of
coverage.

In November 2007, ABC debuted an array of new sports programming, including
NBA basketball, pro boxing, and WWE events, as part of a new five-year deal
with Solar Entertainment. However, due to their high costs and poor ratings,
these programs were later dropped throughout 2008, and its NBA review show
"House of Hoops" was cut back as well and eventually cancelled by April 2008.
However, much of these programs, along with the PBA (as ABC elected not to
renew its contract through the ended after the 2008 Fiesta Conference), would
be picked up by RPN, who had begun a much wider partnership with Solar earlier
in 2007, which led to its privatization by the latter in 2011.

In March 2008, Cojuangco announced that ABC had reached a partnership with MPB
Primedia Inc., a local company backed by Media Prima Berhad of Malaysia as
part of a long-term strategy to make the network more competitive. MPB
Primedia, meanwhile, was formed to serve as seed asset for Media Prima's
proposed private equity fund to invest in various media companies within
Southeast Asia.[3] Cojuangco said MPB Primedia Inc., in principle, would
produce and source most of the entertainment programs while ABC would continue
to be responsible for news programming and operation of the stations.[4] MPB
Primedia was also given exclusive right to schedule and manage sale of ABC-5's
airtime. Christopher Sy was named CEO of MPB Primedia, Inc.; he served in that
capacity until his resignation in January 2009 due to reported differences in
management style.[5]

ABC signed off for the last time at around 22:00 PHT on August 8, 2008 with
its late night newscast _Sentro_ as the last program on air,[6] and then aired
a countdown to its re-launch for much of the next day until 19:00 PHT, when
the network officially re-launched under its new name of TV5. Its programming
lineup aims towards "progressive Pinoys including those young at heart"
(market classes C and D),[7][8] and unveiled its newly upgraded 120-kilowatt
state-of-the-art stereo TV transmitter. _Shall We Dance_ , some shows in _Nick
on TV5_ , _Kerygma TV_ , _Light Talk_ , and _Sunday TVMass_ were the only ABC
programs that were carried over to the line-up of TV5.

In December 2008, a lawsuit was filed by GMA Network, Inc. against ABC, MPB,
and MPB Primedia, alleging that TV5's lease of airtime to Media Prima was
intended to circumvent regulations restricting foreign ownership of
broadcasting companies.[9][9] In response, ABC's media relations head Pat
Marcelo-Magbanua reiterated that the network was a Filipino company that was
self-registered and Filipino-run.[10]

Despite the lawsuit, the network's ratings were revitalized by the new
management, as its audience share increased from 1.9% in July 2008 (prior to
the re-branding) to 11.1% in September 2009.[11]

On October 20, 2009, Media Prima announced that it would be divesting its
share in MPB Primedia / TV5, along with its affiliate ABC TV stations, and
selling it to the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company's broadcasting
division, MediaQuest Holdings as it contributes to the company's losses during
the year. The acquisition was officially announced by Chairman Manuel V.
Pangilinan on March 2, 2010, along with the announcement of a new lineup of
programming to debut on the network, along with a new campaign branding itself
as the "Kapatid" ("sibling") network, in par with its rivals ABS-CBN and GMA
Network.[12] Dream FM and its affiliate stations in other parts of the country
was not part of the acquisition and remained under the Cojuangco management
led by former ABC stockholder Anton Lagdameo; which then acquired a non-
controlling share on Interactive Broadcast Media (IBMI), to continue the
operations of the stations, which became collectively known as the Dream FM
Network, with IBMI as its licensee until its closure on June 2011, with the
airtime of its flagship Manila station being sold to Ultrasonic Broadcasting
System and relaunched as Energy FM.

On October 1, 2010, TV5 took over the management of MediaQuest's Nation
Broadcasting Corporation stations; DWFM was re-launched as a TV5-branded news
radio station on November 8, 2010, Radyo5 92.3 News FM, and DWNB-TV was re-
launched as AksyonTV on February 21, 2011, a news channel based on TV5's
newscast _Aksyon_.[13][14] At its peak, while retaining current position, TV5
was able to outrank GMA Network and become second most-watched network in key
cities in Visayas and Mindanao, including Iloilo, Cebu, Bacolod, Davao,
Cagayan de Oro; and even shared the top spot with ABS-CBN in General Santos
City.[15]

By December 23, 2013, the network began broadcasting from its new
headquarters, the 6,000-square meter TV5 Media Center located in Reliance,
Mandaluyong.[16][17]

In 2014, ABC Development Corporation acquired Filipino broadcast rights to the
2014 Winter Olympics, 2014 Summer Youth Olympics and the 2016 Summer
Olympics.[18]

Despite financial struggles within the management, TV5 continues to be on top
as one of the top three television networks in the country with male and
younger viewers dominated the audience reach due to the network's broadcast of
the Philippine Basketball Association via Sports5 and the strengthened TV5
Kids block, which included the Marvel Studios animation programs last October
2014. The network celebrated its fifth anniversary under the management of
Manny V. Pangilinan coinciding with its trade launch of 2015 shows held at the
Sofitel Philippine Plaza last November 26, 2014.[19]

The network opened the year 2015 with the grand New Year's Eve countdown
dubbed as _Happy sa 2015_ at the Quezon City Memorial Circle.

On January 23, 2015, the network changed its corporate name from **ABC
Development Corporation** to **TV5 Network Inc.**

Ever since Pangilinan acquired TV5, the network incurred increasing losses and
debts brought about by few advertisers (e.g. Unilever) as well as
digitalization. This forced the network to implement a series of retrenchment
of its employees. The biggest retrenchment happened in September 2015, when
TV5's entertainment division got on the verge of dissolution and its employees
were laid off, including Wilma Galvante, its Chief Entertainment Content
Officer. From 4,000 employees in mid-2013, the series of retrenchment resizes
TV5 to merely around 700 employees by the end of 2017.

Incapable of producing original content, TV5 appointed Viva Entertainment CEO,
Vicente "Vic" Del Rosario as the network's new Chief Entertainment Strategist,
implementing changes on TV5's entertainment programming. These included a
formation of the Viva-TV5 joint venture Sari-Sari Channel and outsourcing Viva
Television for its entertainment shows, including a revival of _Ang Panday_,
the return of Diether Ocampo and Claudine Barretto's tandem in _Bakit Manipis
ang Ulap?_ and shows from by-then sister station MTV Pinoy such as _Top 20
Pilipinas_. New shows started to air between November 2015 and February 2016
but were cancelled a few months later due to lack of advertisement support and
poor ratings.

Since January 2016, TV5 and Cignal via Hyper will be the official Free TV and
Pay TV partner, respectively, of the Ultimate Fighting Championship in the
Philippines.

By July 2016, TV5 began airing selected programs from MTV and MTV
International like _Catfish_ , _Ridiculousness_ and _Ex on the Beach_ after
inking a deal with Viacom International Media Networks that month to create
the new MTV on TV5 block.

On September 8, 2016, TV5 cancelled its locally produced programs _Aksyon
Bisaya_ (Cebu) and _Aksyon Dabaw_ (Davao) due to cost-cutting measures. With
this move, the personnel remained employed as they will continue file reports
for _Aksyon_ newscasts.[20]

On September 30, 2016, TV5 President and CEO Emmanuel "Noel" C. Lorenzana
stepped down from his position. He was replaced by basketball coach and
Sports5/D5 Studio head, Vicente "Chot" Reyes the following day. Following his
appointment, the network announced it would be retrenching around 200
employees as part of TV5's digitalization.

In April 2017, TV5 acquired the rights to air the WWE after Fox Philippines
decision to not renew its contract with the WWE due to unknown reasons. The
network previously handle the rights from 2007â€“08 and 2010.

On October 12, 2017, TV5 Network announced its partnership with ESPN,
licensing its PBA, UFC, PSL and NFL rights and giving TV5 access to ESPN
programs and content. The partnership formed the **ESPN5** brand, that is
airing on TV5 and AksyonTV.[21][22] The said deal comes in response to the
network's formal, albeit temporary shift from a general entertainment station
to a sports and news channel.[23]

On February 17, 2018, in line with the recent changes within the network and
in celebration of its 10th anniversary, TV5 was relaunched as The 5 Network or
simply **5** with a new logo and station ID entitled _Get It on 5_ , whereas
the TV on the top right quadrant of the logo has been dropped, making it more
flexible for the other divisions to use it as part of their own identity.
Aside from rebranding, TV5's programming grid has also divided into three
blocks: ESPN5 (Sports), News 5, and On 5 (Entertainment, Anime, Cartoons,
Informative and Home TV Shopping), along with D5 Studio (Digital Content) and
Studio 5 (World-class Filipino productions for audiences across all
platforms). Along with the rebrand, the _Kapatid_ moniker was also
deemphasized and is now only used by News5 and ESPN5 for some of its programs.
But the more visible change was the slow quiet phraseout of Filipino dubbed
movies and foreign-accquired programming, a feature that dated back from its
MPB Primedia era in 2008. Today, even more of its _Disney Club on 5_ programs
and more of its movies are now aired in the English language.

On January 13, 2019, coinciding with the reformat of AksyonTV to 5 Plus, 5
introduced a variation of its 2018 logo. It has also since included the
websites of the division producing the program airing (e.g. TV5.com.ph for
entertainment and blocktimers) as part of their on-screen graphics.

On June 3, 2019, Chot Reyes retired as TV5 President and CEO, which was
immediately replaced by Jane Basas, which leads pay-TV provider and radio
company Cignal TV/Mediascape. Since her appointment, 5 has begun to air news
and sports programming from its co-owned Cignal channels One News, One PH, One
Sports, and PBA Rush; as well as reruns of selected popular entertainment
shows.

On June 19, 1960, broadcast journalist Joaquin "Chino" Roces launches its
television station in the Philippines, known as the Associated Broadcasting
Corporation. Since then, the network evolved and used different brandings
until it became widely known from what it is today.

TV5 used several logos since it was established in 1960. In 1960, the network
used a 5 Logo derived from its flagship station in Metro Manila, DWET-TV
carried in VHF channel 5 until it was shut down in 1972. When it returned to
the airwaves, the network used a more-known ABC 5 logo with an iconic cyclone
icon, incorporating the colors red, blue and greenâ€”colors making up a pixel
shown on the television technology of 1992. The number 5 was removed to the
logo in 1995 but retaining its ABC and the cyclone icon. In 2001, the logo
added its slogan Come home to ABC, the same logo used in April 2004 with its
new slogan Iba Tayo. The last logo as ABC in September 2004 has been enclosed
with a yellow circle. The logo changed after its re-launch in 2008 having the
new name of the network TV5 inside a shaking television. In 2010, the network
used a red circle being shined in the northwest corner carrying the name TV5
with the letters TV in the northeastern part above the largely sized number 5.
The logo adopted a 3D version in 2013 and applying it on-air, although the
2010 2D version oftentimes appear.

In 2018, TV5 adopted its numerical 5 logo, which was first appeared on ESPN5
logo, which was launched on October 2017, dropping the "TV" word on the
northeastern quadrant as part of their _Get It on 5_ campaign. They also
started to display the name of the current program using the format: "(title)
_on 5_ " as the part of the logo (usually applied to entertainment and other
programs not provided by either News5 or ESPN5; except blocktimers, where only
the 5 logo is displayed) resulting to viewers mistakenly thought "on" was part
of the title. The numerical five logo was also simultaneously adopted for TV5
sister divisions News5, Radyo 5, and D5 Studio.

A variation of the current numerical 5 logo was unveiled on January 13, 2019,
similar to the newly launched network, 5 Plus.

5's program lineup includes news and current affairs programs, dubbed
cartoons, movies, American drama, sports, informative, talk shows,
infomercials and Japanese anime shows.

On its second month since its re-launch last August 9, 2008, TV5 has been
reportedly on Top 3 based on the AGB Nielsen survey. It also gained its rating
on their _Nick on TV5_ morning cartoon block, and its popularity because of
their former AniMEGA primetime anime block.

In 2013, the network's ratings improved as they launched the Weekend Do It
Better and Everyday All The Way programming blocks under the helm of the
former Chief Entertainment Content Officer, Wilma Galvante (2012â€“2015),
however some of the programs under the block were discontinued, particularly
due to low ratings.

In 2014, the network launched another set of new programs under the "Happy Ka
Dito!" campaign.

In 2015, TV5 launched more than a dozen programs that are more focused to
light entertainment and sports programming under its "Happy sa 2015" campaign.
Also the said year, viewers sought the return of AniMEGA.

Months later, TV5's entertainment programming were produced by different
content providers, including Unitel Productions (TV5's sister company), The
IdeaFirst Company (formed by former TV5 Entertainment Head Perci Intalan) and
Content Cows Company Inc. (formed by Galvante). By October 14, 2015, TV5
Network named Sari-Sari Network as the main production outfit of TV5. They
also appointed SSN Co-CEO and Viva executive, Vicente "Vic" Del Rosario as the
new Chief Entertainment Strategist of the network. He will handle all of the
entertainment programs broadcast by the network. It happened a month after
TV5, Cignal and Viva inked a deal to create Sari-Sari Network (SSN). New shows
for 2016 were also launched by TV5 together with Viva Entertainment last
November 25, 2015. However, all programs produced by Viva were phased out
between July and August 2016 due to management disagreements following an
attempted partnership of shows.

Just recently, Brillante Mendoza signed a contract with TV5 last December 2016
to make made-for-TV movies to be aired on the network under the _Brillante
Mendoza Presents_ umbrella. Unfortunately, the actual date of mini-series
_Brillante Mendoza Presents: Amo_ , that supposed to premiere on TV5, was
cancelled due to unknown reasons.

Since 2017, NFL games began to broadcast on TV5, replacing the TV5 Kids
presents Cartoon Network block (whereas Cartoon Network shows were moved to
GMA Network since Ben 10 on March 29, 2018 and CNN Philippines on September 1,
2018 in original English-language audio.)[24]

The network also started airing selected shows from the Sari-Sari Channel
under the _Sari-Sari sa Weekends_ banner.

After several months of hiatus, the local drama _Brillante Mendoza Presents:
Amo_ was premiered on April 21, 2018.

On January 13, 2019, all foreign entertainment shows broadcast on 5 started to
be broadcast in the original English-language audio instead of Filipino dubbed
audio (except _Scorpion_ and Sine Squad on weekends).

In March 2019, the Sine Squad movie block on weekends are now aired in
original English audio (except on weekday afternoons in Filipino dubbed audio
starting June 2019).

TV5 programs are seen internationally via Kapatid Channel, and is currently
available in Guam, the Middle East, North Africa, Europe, Canada, and the
United States.

