**Accessible publishing** is an approach to publishing and book design whereby
books and other texts are made available in alternative formats designed to
aid or replace the reading process. Alternative formats that have been
developed to aid different people to read include varieties of larger fonts,
specialised fonts for certain kinds of reading disabilities, Braille, e-books,
and automated Audiobooks and DAISY digital talking books.

Accessible publishing has been made possible through developments in
technology such as Print on demand (POD), E-book readers, the XML structured
data format, and the Internet.

The aim of accessible publishing is to make reading easier for those who have
difficulties doing so. This group includes people who are blind or visually
impaired, people with learning disabilities, and people who are learning a
second language. Accessible publishing also aims to allow people to read
whichever format allows them to read fastest or allows them to absorb the
information in a better way.

In the twenty-first century, the accessible publishing aim is to make every
book available in all formats so that every reader can read with ease and
proficiency.

Guidelines and techniques for publishing in accessible formats have been made
available by several organisations and authors, including:

Before the twenty-first century the publishing industry focused on the
production of printed books. The predominant publishing theory, which stressed
economy of scale, tended to make only one format of a given book available. In
this way they could be mass-produced and made available for the general
public. This model did not allow for any other format to be widely available,
however.

There were a number of developments in technology that increased the
accessibility of books. The first of these was the development of the Braille
language by Louis Braille in 1821.[7] Then there was the development of
audiobooks which originated from the United States Congress in 1931[8] and
became popularised by advances in recording and the use of voice actors.

In 1980, Thorndike Press came into existence as a republisher of large print
books.[9][10] Thorndike bought the rights for large print versions of books
from publishers and then republished them in a larger and more accessible
format for people with reading difficulties.

New portable readers, such as the VictorReader Stream[11] and the Plextalk
Pocket[12] handle talking books in a wide variety of formats including DAISY
Digital Talking Book, MP3, text only, and many others.

New technology, such as the Sony Reader[13] and Amazonâ€™s Kindle, has the
ability to alter the size of the font automatically. For example, the reader
can choose from six different font size settings on the Kindle.[14] The large
font sizes available allow for easier reading for the visually impaired.

ReadHowYouWant is another leader in developing this technology.[15] It works
in partnership with publishers to make books available in all formats all
across the world.[16] This includes specially designed fonts for dyslexia,
macular degeneration and line tracking problems.

**Accessible publishers** :

