**Adrian Keith Goldsworthy** (/ˈɡoʊldzˌwɜːrði/; born 1969) is a British
historian and author who specialises in ancient Roman history.

Adrian Goldsworthy attended Westbourne School, Penarth, He went on to study
ancient and modern history at St John's College, Oxford, completed a D.Phil in
ancient military history from Oxford University in 1994, and then used his
dissertation as the foundation of his first book, _The Roman Army at War 100
BC – AD 200_.

Goldsworthy was appointed a Junior Research Fellow at Cardiff University for
two years, taught briefly at King's College London and was an assistant
professor on the University of Notre Dame's London programme for six years.
His expertise is in Roman history, but he also taught a course on the military
history of the Second World War at the University of Notre Dame.[1]
Goldsworthy said that although he enjoyed teaching, he enjoyed writing more
and now writes full-time.

Goldsworthy has appeared on History Channel documentaries and the television
game show _Time Commanders_ , serving as an expert on battles being fought by
the contestants, and he gave a speech about Roman history and politics to the
cast of a 2010 Liverpool production of Shakespeare's _Antony and Cleopatra_.

In 2010 Goldsworthy began writing a series of military novels - based not in
Roman times but in the Napoleonic era and concentrating on Wellington's
redcoat army, another period which he has great interest in. His first novel,
_True Soldier Gentlemen_ , was published by Weidenfeld & Nicolson in 2011 and
was followed by _Beat the Drums Slowly_ and _Send Me Safely Back Again_. The
titles of each of his novels are taken from the lyrics of popular military
songs of the period.[2] Goldsworthy confesses that these books are in the
genre of novels he himself likes to read.

Asked about his philosophy of life, Goldsworthy responded that he was
"English, so obviously do not have a philosophy. I am a Christian, though, if
you want to know about important beliefs."[3] Goldsworthy lives in South
Wales.[3] He is also a regular contributing speaker to the Hadrianic Society.

Goldsworthy has written several historical works on ancient Rome, especially
the Roman army, and nine novels.

