**_Alay_** (or _4L4Y_ , __Anak Layangan__ , _Anak Jablay_ or __Anak Lebay__ )
is an Indonesian pop culture phenomenon. It is a stereotype describing
something "tacky" and "cheesy" __norak__ or __kampungan__. The Alay culture
phenomena spans a wide array of styles in music, dress, and messaging. It has
often been compared to that of the Jejemon phenomenon originating from the
Philippines, and Harajuku from Japan. Although, the former emerged much later
and the latter was even admired in the West.

The word "Alay" or "Alayen" has no exact meaning or obvious derivation.
Various definitions of alay are offered when one types it on a search engine.
One theory that is widely accepted is that "Alay" is a portmanteau of the term
" _Anak Layangan_ " (Indonesian: Kiteflyer), a pejorative describing someone
having certain physical attributes from spending most of their time outside
and getting sunburnt (e.g. reddened hair and skin). Also kite is considered as
cheap entertainment to the middle and lower class in modern Indonesia,
stereotyping alay as a part of that class. Alay is also consider as people who
have these traits; Throwing garbage not in the trash can and also love to
creates commotion.

__Alay text__ (Indonesian: Tulisan alay) is a form of the Indonesian language
that has undergone "excessive leet transformation". Contrary to the popular
belief that it is "destroying" the national language, grammatical standards
are met in contrast to the modern Indonesian slang language. Similar to the
jejebets, alay texts offer an alternative in compressing words so that they
are under the 160 character-limit in text messages, often to the point that
they are impossible to read. Rules in capitalization are mostly ignored.

Alay text may have originated from the method of making strong passwords for
internet accounts, which requires combinations of small and capital letters,
numbers, as well as special characters. Normally, to keep the password
meaningful and easy to remember, the password would consist of normal words,
where some letters are capitalized or substituted with numbers (e.g. the
letter a with 4, the letter o with 0). Soon this becomes a habit in writing
text in general, and improved with mixing English and Indonesian in one
sentence.

Confusing text that could not be understood properly and probably has no
meaning (except for the writer), is also considered as Alay Text. This type of
text usually contains information of the writer's mood and feeling, it is also
common for the text to contain the writer's own philosophy on a certain topic
such as : love, heart break, and relationship.

According to _The Jakarta Post_ , a high school student from East Java
initiated the trend and shot to fame after her writings were discussed in
forums and blogs not because they were great, but they were in "code". Her
approach in writing attracted a lot of attention, with some people reproducing
her writing in forums and blogs.

