**Albert Jojuan Belle** (born August 25, 1966), known until 1990 as **Joey
Belle** ,[1] is an American former Major League Baseball outfielder for the
Cleveland Indians, Chicago White Sox, and Baltimore Orioles. Belle was one of
the leading sluggers of his time, and in 1995 became the only player to ever
hit 50 doubles and 50 home runs in a season. He was also the first player to
break the 10-million-dollar per year compensation contract in Major League
Baseball.

Belle was a model of consistency, compiling a .295 career batting average and
averaging 37 home runs and 120 RBIs per season between 1991 and 2000. Belle is
one of only six players in MLB history to have nine consecutive 100-RBI
seasons.

Albert and his fraternal twin, Terry, were born on August 25, 1966, in
Shreveport, Louisiana, the son of Albert Belle Sr., a high school baseball and
football coach, and Carrie Belle, a former math teacher.[2] He attained the
rank of Eagle Scout in the Boy Scouts of America.[1] Belle attended Huntington
High School in Shreveport, where he was a star baseball and football player, a
member of the National Honor Society and vice president of the local Future
Business Leaders of America.[3] He graduated sixth in his high school class
and made the all-state baseball team twice.[1] In 1984, he was selected to
play for the USA in the Junior Olympics, in which the U.S. won a silver medal.
He played outfield and pitched, winning one game. After graduation, Belle was
offered an appointment to the United States Air Force Academy. However, Belle
decided to stay close to home, and accepted a baseball scholarship to
Louisiana State University.

Belle played college baseball at Louisiana State University from 1985 to 1987,
where he made 1st team All-SEC in 1986 and 1987 and played in 184 games, with
585 at bats, 194 hits, 30 doubles, 49 home runs, 172 runs batted in, 157 runs,
a .670 slugging percentage, and a .332 batting average. In 1987, he played
collegiate summer baseball in the Cape Cod Baseball League for the Hyannis
Mets.

After college, he was drafted by the Cleveland Indians.

Belle became the fourth player to have eight straight seasons of 30 home runs
and 100 RBIs, joining Babe Ruth, Jimmie Foxx and Lou Gehrig (a feat since
matched by Albert Pujols, Rafael Palmeiro, Manny Ramirez and Alex Rodriguez).
He was an accomplished baserunner, with a career high 23 steals in 1993, and
17 steals in 1999 despite hip problems. He led the league three times in RBIs,
three times in total bases, three times in extra-base hits and twice in
slugging. He was a five-time All-Star between 1993 and 1997. He had a powerful
throwing arm, and was a gifted pitcher in high school. His range factor by
games played was consistently higher than the major league average at that
position;[4] nevertheless, he still managed to accrue a -12.5 _defensive_ WAR
during 12 major league seasons.[4]

Belle's career highs in home runs, RBIs, batting average, runs scored and
walks occurred in five separate seasons. In 2006, the _Hardball Times_
published a statistical comparison of Belle's career statistics with that of
60 of his current and former peers. The article ranked him in career "prime
value", behind current Hall of Famer Ralph Kiner and recent inductee Frank
Thomas.[5]

In 1994, he lost the batting title to New York Yankees outfielder Paul
O'Neill, .359 to .357. His postseason record was limited to two hitting
appearances, in which only his batting average suffered: he hit .230/.405/.557
(batting average, on-base percentage and slugging percentage, respectively)
with six home runs and 14 RBIs in 61 at-bats.

In 1995, he became the first player in major league history to hit 50 home
runs and 50 doubles in the same season; the last player before him to reach as
many as 40 in both categories had been Willie Stargell in 1973. The
achievement was especially impressive because Belle played only 143 games in
1995 due to a season shortened by the previous year's player strike.

His reputation, and disdain of the media cost him votes for the 1995 MVP
Award. That he was caught cheating the year before, in the infamous 1994 Bat
Burglary, didn't help his cause either. He finished second in the voting to
the Boston Red Sox' Mo Vaughn even though he led the American League that
season in runs scored, home runs, RBIs, slugging percentage and total bases,
and outpaced Vaughn head-to-head in every important offensive category except
RBIs (both men had 126); both players' teams reached the playoffs. This was in
the middle of a three-year streak in which Belle finished 3rd, 2nd and 3rd for
the American League MVP. Belle had two other top ten MVP finishes, in 1993
(7th) and 1998 (8th).

In the winter of 1996, he signed a 5-year, $55 million ($85,840,589 today)
deal with the Chicago White Sox as a free agent. This contract made him the
highest paid player in baseball for a brief period.[6] He enjoyed two great
seasons in Chicago, including a career-high 27-game hitting streak in May
1997, and came close to another 50/50 season in 1998 with 49 home runs (a
White Sox team record that still stands) and 48 doubles. He also drove in 152
runs to break Zeke Bonura's single-season franchise record of 138 in 1936 (to
date, the RBI total also remains a White Sox single-season record).
Additionally, when Cal Ripken, Jr. ended his record consecutive game streak at
2,632 in September 1998 on the last day of the season, it was Belle who took
over as the major leagues' active leader in the category.

His White Sox contract had an unusual clause allowing him to demand that he
would remain one of the three highest paid players in baseball. In October
1998 he invoked the clause, and when the White Sox declined to give him a
raise he immediately became a free agent. He again became the game's highest
paid player, signing a five-year, $65 million ($97,759,688 today) deal with
the Baltimore Orioles. But his career ended just two seasons later when he was
forced into retirement at age 34 by degenerative hip osteoarthritis. He was,
however, kept on Baltimore's active 40-man roster for the next three years as
a condition of the insurance policy which largely reimbursed the Orioles for
the remainder of his contract.

Belle homered in the final at-bat of his major-league career, at Oriole Park
at Camden Yards on October 1, 2000.[7]

In 1990, the Indians sent Belle to the Cleveland Clinic for two months for
alcoholism rehabilitation.[1]

Belle was suspended in 1994 for using a corked bat, and gained further
notoriety for sending teammate Jason Grimsley through the building's ceiling
panel to break into the locked umpires' dressing room to retrieve his corked
bat and substitute it with another teammate's bat, resulting in a seven-game
suspension. The revelation of Belle's use of corked bats was given more
emphasis when Cleveland teammate Omar Vizquel wrote in his autobiography that
it would be naive to suggest otherwise and that "all of Albert's bats were
corked."[8] He was fined in 1996 for knocking down Brewers infielder Fernando
Vi√±a, who had blocked his way between bases.[9]

Sports reporters resented Belle's refusal to grant interviews before a game. A
profane outburst directed at a group of reporters in his team's dugout,
including NBC Sports personality Hannah Storm, was widely reported during the
1995 World Series. He was unrepentant afterward: "The Indians wanted me to
issue a statement of regret when the fine was announced, but I told them to
take it out. I apologize for nothing."[10]

Eventually, Belle routinely refused to speak with the media. "I don't get
excited talking about myself", he explained. "Guys such as Sandy Koufax, Joe
DiMaggio and Steve Carlton did not interview, and it was no big deal. They
were quiet. I am also quiet. I just want to concentrate on baseball. Why does
everyone want to hear me talk, anyway?"[11]

But the media did not ignore him. Buster Olney, then of _The New York Times_ ,
would write about his outbursts as a Cleveland Indian:

In 2001, following his retirement, the _New York Daily News'_ columnist Bill
Madden wrote:

In his first year of Hall of Fame eligibility (2006), he garnered only 7.7% of
the baseball writers' votes, missing election by an extremely wide margin.[14]
But his vote total was high enough to keep his name on the ballot for the
following year. In 2007, however, he garnered only 19 votes (3.5%).

In retirement, Belle had his first encounter with the Cleveland Indians since
leaving the club in 1996, during their 2012 spring training in Goodyear,
Arizona and was joined by former teammates Kenny Lofton, Sandy Alomar, Jr.,
and Carlos Baerga.[9]

Belle has had a chilly relationship with the Indians franchise during his
retirement. He declined to attend the 20th anniversary celebration of the 1995
World Series team and he declined to attend the ceremony when he was inducted
into the Indians team Hall of Fame.[15]

In October 1995, Belle's house in Euclid, Ohio was egged after turning away
trick-or-treaters on Halloween. Belle chased one of the trick-or-treaters in
his car.[16] Belle was fined $100 for reckless operation of a vehicle. The
guardian of the teenager sued Belle for $850,000 contending that Belle's car
bumped into the teenager.[17] The lawsuit was settled in 1997.[18]

In 2006 Belle was sentenced to 90 days in jail and five years' probation after
he admitted to stalking his former girlfriend.[19]

On March 25, 2018, Belle was arrested in Scottsdale, Arizona and charged with
indecent exposure and DUI.[19] All charges were dismissed the following
month.[20]

**College (LSU):**

**Major League Baseball (Cleveland Indians, Chicago White Sox, Baltimore
Orioles):**

