**Albert Finney** (9 May 1936 – 7 February 2019) was an English actor who
worked in film, television and theatre. He attended the Royal Academy of
Dramatic Art and worked in the theatre before attaining prominence on screen
in the early 1960s, debuting with _The Entertainer_ (1960), directed by Tony
Richardson, who had previously directed him in the theatre. He maintained a
successful career in theatre, film and television.

He is known for his roles in _Saturday Night and Sunday Morning_ (also 1960),
_Tom Jones_ (1963), _Two for the Road_ (1967), _Scrooge_ (1970), _Annie_
(1982), _The Dresser_ (1983), _Miller's Crossing_ (1990), _A Man of No
Importance_ (1994), _Erin Brockovich_ (2000), _Big Fish_ (2003), _The Bourne
Ultimatum_ (2007), _Before the Devil Knows You're Dead_ (2007), _The Bourne
Legacy_ (2012), and the James Bond film _Skyfall_ (2012).

A recipient of BAFTA , Golden Globe, Emmy and Screen Actors Guild awards,
Finney was nominated for an Academy Award five times, as Best Actor four
times, for _Tom Jones_ (1963), _Murder on the Orient Express_ (1974), _The
Dresser_ (1983), and _Under the Volcano_ (1984), and as Best Supporting Actor
for _Erin Brockovich_ (2000). He received several awards for his performance
as Winston Churchill in the 2002 BBC–HBO television biographical film _The
Gathering Storm_.

Finney was born in Salford, Lancashire, the son of Alice (née Hobson) and
Albert Finney, a bookmaker.[1] He was educated at Tootal Drive Primary School,
Salford Grammar School and the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA), from
which he graduated in 1956.[2]

While at RADA Finney made an early TV appearance playing Mr Hardcastle in
Oliver Goldsmith's _She Stoops to Conquer._ The BBC filmed and broadcast the
RADA students' performances at the Vanbrugh Theatre in London on Friday 6
January 1956. Other members of the cast included Roy Kinnear and Richard
Briers.[3][4]

In February 1956 John Fernald, principal of RADA, gave Finney his first major
role in the Vanbrugh Theatre's student production of Ian Dallas' play _The
Face of Love_ , as Shakespeare's Troilus.[5] Finney graduated from RADA and
became a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company.

Finney was offered a contract by the Rank Organisation but turned it down to
perform for the Birmingham Rep.[6] He was in a production of _The Miser_ for
Birmingham Rep, which was filmed for the BBC in 1956. Also for the BBC he
appeared in _The Claverdon Road Job_ (1957) and _View Friendship and Marriage_
(1958).

At Birmingham he played the title role in _Henry V_.[7]

Finney made his first appearance on the London stage in 1958, in Jane Arden's
_The Party_ , directed by Charles Laughton, who starred in the production
along with his wife, Elsa Lanchester.

He guest starred on several episodes of _Emergency-Ward 10_ and was Lysander
in a TV version of _A Midsummer Night's Dream_ (1959) directed by Peter Hall.

In 1959 Finney appeared at Stratford in the title role in _Coriolanus_ ,
replacing an ill Laurence Olivier.[8]

Finney's first film appearance was in Tony Richardson's _The Entertainer_
(1960), with Laurence Olivier. Finney and Alan Bates played Olivier's sons.

Finney made his breakthrough in the same year with his portrayal of a
disillusioned factory worker in Karel Reisz's film version of Alan Sillitoe's
_Saturday Night and Sunday Morning_ (1960), produced by Richardson. The film
was a box-office success, being the third most popular film in Britain that
year. It earned over half a million pounds in profit.[9]

Finney then did _Billy Liar_ (1960) on stage and for British television.[10]

Finney had been chosen to play T. E. Lawrence in David Lean's production of
_Lawrence of Arabia_ after a successful and elaborate screen-test that took
four days to shoot. However, Finney baulked at signing a multi-year contract
for producer Sam Spiegel and chose not to accept the role.[11]

Finney created the title role in _Luther_ , the 1961 play by John Osborne
depicting the life of Martin Luther, a key early figure of the Protestant
Reformation. He performed the role with the English Stage Company in London,
Nottingham, Paris and New York.[12] The original West End run at the Phoenix
ended in March 1962, after 239 performances there, when Finney had to leave
the cast to fulfill a contractual obligation with a film company.[13]

Finney starred in the Academy Award-winning 1963 film _Tom Jones_ , directed
by Richardson and written by Osborne. The success of _Tom Jones_ saw British
exhibitors vote Finney the ninth most popular star at the box office in
1963.[14]

Finney followed this with a small part in _The Victors_ (1963). He then made
his Broadway debut in _Luther_ in 1963. When that run ended he decided to take
a year off and sail around the world. "People told me to cash in on my success
while I was hot," he later said. "I'd been acting for about eight years and
had only had one vacation... Captain Cook had been a hero of mine when I was a
kid, and I thought it would be exciting to go to some of the places in the
Pacific where he'd been."[6]

The success of _Tom Jones_ enabled Finney produce his next film, _Night Must
Fall_ , in 1964, which he also starred in and which was directed by Reisz.

Finney undertook a season of plays at the National Theatre.[ _when?_ ][15]

He returned to films with _Two for the Road_ (1967) co starring Audrey
Hepburn.

He and Michael Medwin formed a production company, Memorial Productions, which
made _Privilege_ (1967), directed by Peter Watkins; _The Burning_ (1968), a
short directed by Stephen Frears; and _If...._ (1968), directed by Lindsay
Anderson. Memorial also did stage productions, such as _A Day in the Death of
Joe Egg_ , which Finney performed in London and then Broadway.[16] Memorial
also produced some in which Finney did not appear, such as _Spring and Port
Wine_ and _The Burgular_.

Memorial then made _Charlie Bubbles_ (1968), which Finney starred in and also
directed. Liza Minnelli made her feature debut in the movie.[17] Finney later
called it "the most intense sense of creation I've ever had."[6]

As an actor only he made _The Picasso Summer_ (1969). Finney played the title
role in the musical _Scrooge_ in 1970.

Finney then made _Gumshoe_ (1971), the first feature directed by Stephen
Frears, for Memorial. Memorial continued to produce films in which Finney did
not appear: _Spring and Port Wine_ (1970), with James Mason; _Loving Memory_
(1971), an early directorial effort from Tony Scott; _Bleak Moments_ (1971),
the first feature from Mike Leigh; _O Lucky Man!_ (1973) for Anderson; and
_Law and Disorder_ (1974); hot in Hollywood.

In 1972 Finney returned to the stage after a six-year absence with _Alpha
Beta_ , which he later filmed for TV with Rachel Roberts.[15]

Memorial Productions pulled out of producing and Finney focused on acting. "It
was OK at first," he later said, "but in the end it was sitting in an office,
pitching ideas to Hollywood and waiting for the phone to ring."[18]

Finney played Agatha Christie's Belgian master detective Hercule Poirot in the
film _Murder on the Orient Express_ (1974). Finney became so well known for
the role that he complained that it typecast him for a number of years,
"People really do think I am 300 pounds with a French accent", he
said.[19][20]

He announced he intended to direct a film, _The Girl in Melanie Klein_ , for
Memorial, but it was not made.[21]

Finney decided to take time off from features and focus on stage acting, doing
the classics at the National Theatre in London. "I felt that it needed
commitment," he later said. "When you're making movies all the time, you stop
breathing. You literally don't breathe in the same way that you do when you're
playing the classics. When you have to deliver those long, complex speeches on
stage, you can't heave your shoulders after every sentence. The set of muscles
required for that kind of acting need to be trained. I really wanted to try
and do justice to my own potential in the parts. I didn't want to be a movie
actor just dropping in, doing Hamlet and taking off again. I wanted to feel
part of the company."[6]

Finney was at the National for over three years[ _when?_ ] during which he
played in Hamlet, Macbeth, Tamburlaine, and plays by Chekhov.[6]

Finney made a TV movie _Forget-Me-Not-Lane_ in 1975, which was written by
Peter Nichols, and he also performed a cameo role in _The Duellists_ (1977),
the first feature directed by Ridley Scott. He also released an album through
Motown.[22]

Finney had not played a lead role in a feature film in six years, and started
to think about returning to cinema. The last two successful films he had made
were _Scrooge_ and _Orient Express_ in which he was heavily disguised. "Most
Americans probably think I weigh 300 pounds, have black hair and talk with a
French accent like Hercule Poirot," said Finney. "So I thought they should
have a look at me while I was still almost a juvenile and kind of cute."[6]

Finney decided to make six films in succession "so that I could relax and get
back into it again. In order to feel really assured and comfortable in front
of a camera, you've got to do it for a while."[6]

The first three were thrillers: _Loophole_ (1981), with Susannah York;
_Wolfen_ (1981), directed by Michael Wadleigh; and _Looker_ (1981), written
and directed by Michael Crichton.[23]

He received excellent reviews for his performance in the drama _Shoot the
Moon_ (1982).[24] Finney said the role "required personal acting; I had to dig
into myself. When you have to expose yourself and use your own vulnerability,
you can get a little near the edge."[6]

Less well received was his performance as Daddy Warbucks in the Hollywood film
version of _Annie_ (1982), which was directed by John Huston. Finney said
going into this film after _Shoot the Moon_ was "marvelous. I use a completely
different side of myself as Warbucks. 'Annie' is show biz; it's open, simple
and direct. It needs bold, primary colors. I don't have to reveal the inner
workings of the character, and that's a relief."[6]

Finney went into _The Dresser_ (1983), directed by Peter Yates, which earned
him a Best Actor Oscar Nomination. He then played the title role in the TV
movie _Pope John Paul II_ (1984), his American TV debut.[ _citation needed_ ]

Huston cast Finney in the lead role of _Under the Volcano_ (1984), which
earned both men great acclaim, including another Oscar nomination for
Finney.[25]

Finney played the lead role of Sydney Kentridge in _The Biko Inquest_ , a 1984
dramatisation of the inquest into the death of Steve Biko which was filmed for
TV following a London run.[26]

Finney performed on stage in _Orphans_ in 1986, then did the _film version_ ,
directed by Alan J. Pakula.[27] He had the lead in a TV mini series, _The
Endless Game_ (1989), written and directed by Bryan Forbes.[ _citation needed_
]

Finney began the 1990s with the lead role in a film for HBO, _The Image_
(1990). He received great acclaim playing the gangster boss in _Miller's
Crossing_ (1990), replacing Trey Wilson shortly before filming.

Finney also made an appearance at Roger Waters' _The Wall – Live in Berlin_
(1990), where he played "The Judge" during the performance of "The Trial".[28]

Finney did _The Green Man_ (1990) for British TV, based on a novel by Kingsley
Amis.[29]

He followed it with _The Playboys_ (1992) for Gillies MacKinnon; _Rich in
Love_ (1993) for Bruce Beresford; _The Browning Version_ (1994) for Mike
Figgis; _A Man of No Importance_ (1994), for Suri Krishnamma; and _The Run of
the Country_ (1995) for Peter Yates.

He had the lead role in Dennis Potter's final two plays, _Karaoke_ (1996) and
_Cold Lazarus_ (both 1996). In the latter he played a frozen, disembodied
head.[30][31]

Finney did _Nostromo_ (1997) for television, and _Washington Square_ (1997)
for Agnieszka Holland then made _A Rather English Marriage_ (1998) with Tom
Courtenay.[32] He had support roles in _Breakfast of Champions_ (1999) and
_Simpatico_ (1999).

Finney had his biggest hit in a long while with _Erin Brockovich_ (2000),
alongside Julia Roberts for Steven Soderbergh.

Finney had a cameo in Soderbergh's _Traffic_ (2000) and played Ernest
Hemingway in _Hemingway, the Hunter of Death_ (2001) for TV.

He had the lead in _Delivering Milo_ (2001) and in 2002 his critically
acclaimed portrayal of Winston Churchill in _The Gathering Storm_ won him
British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA), Emmy and Golden Globe
awards as Best Actor.[25][33][34]

He also played the title role in the television series _My Uncle Silas_ ,
based on the short stories by H. E. Bates, about a roguish but lovable
poacher-cum-farm labourer looking after his great-nephew. The show ran for two
series broadcast in 2001 and 2003.[35]

Finney had a key role in _Big Fish_ (2001) directed by Tim Burton, and did
another cameo for Soderbergh in _Ocean's Twelve_ (2004). He sang in Tim
Burton's _Corpse Bride_ (2005)[36] and the film of _Aspects of Love_ (2005).

Finney was reunited with Ridley Scott in _A Good Year_ (2006). He had support
roles in _Amazing Grace_ (2006), _The Bourne Ultimatum_ (2007), and _Before
the Devil Knows You're Dead_ (2007). His last appearance in a feature was in
_Skyfall_ (2012).

Even with his success on the big screen, Finney never abandoned his stage
performances. He continued his association with the National Theatre Company
at the Old Vic in London, where he performed in the mid-1960s in Shakespeare's
_Much Ado About Nothing_ and Chekhov's _The Cherry Orchard_.

He received Tony Award nominations for _Luther_ (1964) and _A Day in the Death
of Joe Egg_ (1968),[25] and also starred on stage in _Love for Love_ ,
Strindberg's _Miss Julie_ , _Black Comedy_ , _The Country Wife_ , _Alpha Beta_
, Beckett's _Krapp's Last Tape_ , _Tamburlaine the Great_ , _Another Time_
and, his last stage appearance, in 1997, _"Art"_ by Yasmina Reza, which
preceded the 1998 Tony Award-winning Broadway run.

He won an Olivier Award for _Orphans_ in 1986 and won three _Evening Standard_
Theatre Awards for Best Actor.[37]

In 1994, Finney played a gay bus conductor in early 1960s Dublin in _A Man of
No Importance_.[38]

A lifelong supporter of Manchester United, Finney narrated the documentary
_Munich_ , about the air crash that killed most of the Busby Babes in 1958,
which was shown on United's TV channel MUTV in February 2008.[39]

With his first wife, Jane Wenham, he had a son,[25] who works in the film
industry as a camera operator.[40] In 1970, nearly a decade after his divorce
from Wenham, Finney married French actress Anouk Aimée, a union that lasted
eight years. He then married for the third and last time in 2006, to Penelope
Delmage, who at the time was working as a travel agent. They remained together
until Finney's death.[25][40]

Finney in May 2011 publicly disclosed that he had been receiving treatment for
kidney cancer.[41] According to a 2012 interview, he had been diagnosed with
the disease five years earlier and underwent surgery, followed by six rounds
of chemotherapy.[42] He died at age 82 from a chest infection on 7 February
2019, at the Royal Marsden Hospital in London.[43][44][45]

Finney declined the offer of a CBE in 1980, as well as a knighthood in 2000.
He criticised such royally bestowed honours as "perpetuating snobbery".[46]

Julia Roberts mentioned Finney in her Oscar acceptance speech for Best Actress
in _Erin Brockovich_ , calling him a "pleasure to act with".[47]

Finney received 13 BAFTA nominations (nine film, four TV), winning two:[25]

In addition Finney received the BAFTA Academy Fellowship Award in 2001.[48]

He won an Emmy Award, for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or Made for
TV Movie, for his performance as Winston Churchill in HBO's _The Gathering
Storm_.[34] He had previously been nominated for the HBO telefilm _The Image_
(1990).[49]

He received nine Golden Globe Award nominations, winning three:[50]

For his work on Broadway, Finney was nominated for two Tony Awards, both for
Best Actor in a Play, for _Luther_ in 1964, and _A Day in the Death of Joe
Egg_ in 1968.[25] For the London stage, he won the Laurence Olivier Award, for
Best Actor, for _Orphans_ in 1986.[51] He won the Evening Standard Theatre
Award for Best Actor three times, for _A Flea in Her Ear_ in 1966,
_Tamburlaine the Great_ in 1976 and _Orphans_ in 1986.[52]

Other awards include: a Golden Laurel for his work on _Scrooge_ (1970) and for
his work on _Tom Jones_ , for which he was the 3rd Place Winner for the "Top
Male Comedy Performance" for 1964. He was honoured by the Los Angeles Film
Critics Association as Best Actor for _Under the Volcano_ (which he tied with
F. Murray Abraham for _Amadeus_ ),[53] the National Board of Review Best Actor
award for _Saturday Night and Sunday Morning_ ,[54] and the New York Film
Critics Circle Best Actor award for _Tom Jones_.[55]

Finney won two Screen Actors Guild Awards, for Best Performance by a Male
Actor in a Supporting Role, for _Erin Brockovich_ , and as a member of the
acting ensemble in the film _Traffic_. He was also nominated for _The
Gathering Storm_ , for Best Performance by a Male Actor in a Television Movie
or Miniseries, but did not win.[56][57]

He won the Silver Berlin Bear award for Best Actor, for _The Dresser_ , at the
34th Berlin International Film Festival in 1984.[58]

He won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor, for _Tom Jones_ , at the Venice Film
Festival.[59]

