**Alli Sports** (legally **Alli, Alliance of Action Sports, LLC** ) is an
organizer of extreme sports events that is subsidiary of the NBC Sports
Ventures LLC, a unit of NBC Sports Group. The group was formed in 2008 as a
joint venture between NBC and MTV Networks, when the latter bought a stake in
an extreme sports tour that NBC had been operating, the Dew Tour. While MTV
parent Viacom has since sold its share in the venture, it still operates as a
part of NBC.

Alli was formed in 2008 after NBC sold a stake in the extreme sports tour, the
Dew Tour, it had run in partnership with Live Nation, the Dew Tour, to MTV
Networks. NBC Sports' chairman Dick Ebersol believed that the Tour needed a
secondary broadcast partner, and NBC staff believed that access to MTV's cable
channels would help provide exposure to the tour to its target demographic.
The partnership adopted the brand Alli, established a new online operation for
the group, and added MTV2 as a new broadcast partner for the Dew Tour. Under
MTV's part-ownership, Alli also expanded its operations with several new
tours, such as the Winter Dew Tour, Gatorade Free Flow Tour and the AMA
Motocross Championship series.[1]

In June 2011, MTV Networks announced it would sell its share in the
partnership back to NBC Sports Group, as it no longer planned to televise
sports programming on MTV2. NBC Sports Group's senior vice president Kevin
Monaghan felt that in the wake of its merger with Comcast, it now had enough
resources that could be leveraged to help continue Alli's growth. After the
return to NBC ownership, Alli events began to be shifted off of non-NBC
networks â€“ coverage of the AMA Motocross Championship previously aired by Fuel
TV and Speed respectively would move to the Alli website and NBC Sports
Network for its 2012 season, and the Summer Dew Tour (previously aired by USA
Network and MTV2) were migrated to Comcast SportsNet and NBC Sports Network in
2012.[2]

In May 2013, the United States Ski and Snowboard Association reached an
agreement with Alli to allow a Winter Dew Tour event in Breckenridge, Colorado
to serve as a qualifying event for the 2014 Winter Olympics team. The
arrangement gives the USSA control over certain aspects of the event (such as
its format, and selling advertising to its own official sponsors during the
telecast), and will also be used to help promote its own Grand Prix series.[3]

In 2015, facing declining viewership, NBC shuttered its action sports
division, and sold the Dew Tour to TEN: The Enthusiast Network.[4]

Alli operates the following series:

