**Al Minhad Air Base** (Arabic: قاعدة المنهاد الجوية‎) (IATA: **NHD** , ICAO:
**OMDM** ) is a military installation in the United Arab Emirates. The base is
located approximately 15 miles (24 km) south of Dubai and is operated by the
United Arab Emirates Air Force. It is currently the headquarters of Joint Task
Force 633 and supports Australian operations in the Middle East.

The airfield resides at an elevation of 174 ft (53 m) above mean sea level. It
has one runway, 09/27 which has an asphalt surface measuring 3,953 m × 45 m
(12,969 ft × 148 ft),[1] and a parallel taxiway with a width of 38 m (125 ft).

Several foreign countries allied to the United Arab Emirates are believed to
have made use of Al Minhad Air Base since the early 2000s to support the
logistics supply chain for their army operations in Afghanistan. Use of the Al
Minhad Air Base is a sensitive matter for the Government of the United Arab
Emirates, which imposes a diplomatic agreement stating that the militaries of
foreign governments not advertise the host nation nor location of their
operations in the United Arab Emirates due to "local sensitivities" about
allowing a foreign military presence within its borders.[2]

The British Armed Forces have operations at the base.[2][3][4] No. 906
Expeditionary Air Wing RAF was stood up at the base on 15 January 2013.[5] 906
Wing was an expansion of the RAF's presence; previously, prior to Christmas
2012, No. 6 Squadron RAF had exercised their Eurofighter Typhoons from the
UAE.

The Canadian Forces operated a forward logistics support facility in the
Middle East which they had codenamed Camp Mirage. It is widely believed that
Camp Mirage was located at Al Minhad Air Base from its founding in fall 2001
until its closure in fall 2010 due to an unrelated disagreement over securing
additional landing rights for UAE's civilian airlines at Canadian airports.
The United States military relied on the UAE bases for assistance during the
Gulf War and the recent conflict in Iraq.

The ADF have used Al Minhad as their main transport and logistics hub in the
Middle East since the withdrawal of Australian combat forces from Iraq in
2008. The RAAF had operated AP-3C Orions from the base from 2003 to support
operations in the region, however it was not until 2008 when an agreement was
signed which allowed Australia to command its regional headquarters there.[6]
The Australian Defence Force maintains a facility at Al Minhad,[7] and as part
of the military intervention against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
has deployed Boeing F/A-18F Super Hornets, Boeing E-7A Wedgetails and Airbus
KC-30As.[8] During early 2015 the Boeing F/A-18F Super Hornets were replaced
by McDonnell Douglas F/A-18A Hornets.[9]

The New Zealand Defence Force and the Armed forces of the Netherlands also
have deployed assets here.[2][4]

The Italian Air Force have deployed the Task Force Air (TFA) since July 1,
2015 (previously located to Al Bateen (Abu Dhabi) since 2002) to support
operations in the region.[10]

