The **'apologetic'**[1] or **parochial apostrophe**[2] is the distinctive use
of apostrophes in Modern Scots orthography.[3] Apologetic apostrophes
generally occurred where a consonant exists in the Standard English cognate,
as in __a'__ (all), __gi'e__ (give) and __wi'__ (with).

The practice, unknown in Older Scots, was introduced in the 18th century[4] by
writers such as Allan Ramsay,[5] Robert Fergusson and Robert Burns as part of
a process of Anglicisation. The 18th-century practice was also adopted by
later writers such as Walter Scott, John Galt and Robert Louis Stevenson. It
produced an easily understood spurious Scots that was very popular with
English readers and on the English stage. It was also sometimes forced on
reluctant authors by publishers desirous of a wider circulation for their
books.[6]

The custom "also had the unfortunate effect of suggesting that Broad Scots was
not a separate language system, but rather a divergent or inferior form of
English".[7] The use of the apologetic apostrophe became less widespread[1]
after the appearance of the 'Style Sheet'[8] in 1947 and is now considered
unacceptable,[9] the apostrophe-less forms such as __aw__ (all), __gie__
(give) and __wi__ (with) being preferable.

Early Scots had undergone a process of L-vocalisation where /l/ was preceded
by the vowels /a/ and /u̞/ in closed syllables, which was completed by the end
of the 14th century.[10] The cluster /al/ vocalised to /aː/ and /u̞l/ to /uː/
hence spellings such as _a '_ (all), _ba '_ (ball), _ca '_ (call), _sa't_
(salt) and _ha'd_ (hold),[11] and _fu '_ and _pu '_ with the doublets _full_
[fʌl] and _pull_ [pʌl].[12] The standard[13] literary apostrophe-less
spellings for /aː/ (also /ɑː, ɔː/) were ⟨au⟩ and ⟨aw⟩[14] with ⟨au⟩ generally
occurring word initially or medially, and ⟨aw⟩ occurring word final.[15] Thus
_aw_ (all), _baw_ (ball), _caw_ (call), _saut_ (salt) and _haud_ (hold). The
standard literary spelling of /uː/ was ⟨ou⟩, generally preferred in the
_Scottish National Dictionary_ ,[16] although the use of ⟨oo⟩, borrowed from
Standard English, became popular by the 19th century.[17] Thus _fou_ and _pou_
, but the form _fu_ functioning as the cognate of the suffix 'ful'. L also
vocalised after /o̞/ in closed syllables[10] resulting in a diphthong which
became /ʌu/ in Modern Scots, for example _knowe_ (knoll), _fowk_ (folk),
_gowf_ (golf) and _gowd_ (gold).[18]

The consonant clusters in the inflectional endings ⟨ing⟩ and ⟨and⟩, cognate
with Standard English ⟨ing⟩, changed to /n/ in Early Scots,[19] the modern
realisations generally being /ɪn/ and /ən/[20] hence the spelling _in '_.

The cluster ⟨mb⟩ had been reduced to /m/ in Early Scots[19] hence spelling
such as _num'er_ (number), _cham'er_ (chamber) and _tim'er_ (timber), the
standard literary apostrophe-less spellings being _nummer_ , _chaumer_ and
_timmer_.[21]

The cluster ⟨nd⟩ is reduced to /n/ in some Scots dialects[22] hence spellings
such as _caun'le_ (candle), _haun '_ (hand) and _staun '_ (stand)[21] though
the ⟨d⟩ is generally written in the literary standard, thus _caundle_ ,
_haund_ and _staund_.

The cluster ⟨ld⟩ is also reduced to /l/ in some Scots dialects,[22] hence
spellings such as _aul '_ (old), _caul '_ (cold) and _faul '_ (fold)[21]
though the ⟨d⟩ is generally written in the literary standard, thus _auld_ ,
_cauld_ and _fauld_.

By the Middle Scots period, /f/ and /v/ deletion had occurred intervocalically
and between a nasal/liquid consonant and a vowel.[19] Hence spellings such as
_de'il_ (devil), _gi'e_ (give), _ha'e_ (have), _lo'e_ (love), _o '_ (of),
_o'er_ (over) and _sil'er_ (silver), the standard literary apostrophe-less
spellings being _deil_ , _gie_ , _hae_ , _lue_ , _o_ , _ower_ and
_siller_.[23]

Also by that period, word-final /θ/ had been lost in a number of words.[19]
Hence spellings such as _fro'_ (froth), _quo'_ (quoth), _wi'_ (with) and
_mou'_ (mouth), the standard literary apostrophe-less spellings being _fro_ ,
_quo_ , _wi_ and _mou_ ,[23] the latter having the doublet _mooth_.

In some Scots words the realisation differs from that of the Standard English
cognate; hence spellings such as _bak '_ (bake), _mak '_ (make) and _tak '_
(take), the standard literary apostrophe-less spellings being _bak_ , _mak_
and _tak_.

Many words in Scots have both a full form and a contracted form. In contracted
forms, an apostrophe is generally used in place of the elided graphemes, for
example, _e'en_ and _even_ , _e'er_ and _iver_ (ever), _eneu '_ and _eneuch_
(enough), _lea '_ and _leave_ , _ne'er_ and _niver_ (never), _ne'er's day_ and
_new year's day_ , _nor'land_ and _northland_.

In the construction of the past tense or past participle, Scots often appends
the apostrophe to verbs ending with _ee_ to prevent three _e_ s from occurring
in a single word:

Scots also uses, as does English, the apostrophe to indicate contractions of
multiple words: _A'm_ (I'm), _wi't_ (with it), _ye're_ (you're), _o't_ (of
it).

