؋ ​₳ ​ ฿ ​₿ ​ ₵ ​¢ ​₡ ​₢ ​ $ ​₫ ​₯ ​֏ ​ ₠ ​€ ​ ƒ ​₣ ​ ₲ ​ ₴ ​ ₭ ​ ₺ ​₾ ​ ₼ ​ℳ
​₥ ​ ₦ ​ ₧ ​₱ ​₰ ​£ ​ 元 圆 圓 ​﷼ ​៛ ​₽ ​₹ ₨ ​ ₪ ​ ৳ ​₸ ​₮ ​ ₩ ​ ¥ ​円

The **apostrophe** ( **'** or **’** ) character is a punctuation mark, and
sometimes a diacritical mark, in languages that use the Latin alphabet and
some other alphabets. In English it is used for several purposes:[1]

The word _apostrophe_ comes ultimately from Greek ἡ ἀπόστροφος [προσῳδία] (
_hē apóstrophos [prosōidía]_ , '[the accent of] turning away or elision'),
through Latin and French.[2][3]

According to Unicode, the apostrophe is the same character as the closing
single quotation mark, although the semantics of this character are "context-
dependent".[4] (When it functions as a closing quotation mark, it is always
paired with an opening quotation mark.) The apostrophe also looks similar to,
but is not the same as, the prime symbol ( ′ ), which is used to indicate
measurement in feet or arcminutes and for various mathematical purposes, and
the ʻokina ( ʻ ), which represents a glottal stop in Polynesian languages.
Other substitutes such as ´ (acute) and ‘ (open single quotation mark) are
common due to ambiguous treatment of the apostrophe in digital typesetting (as
explained below).

The apostrophe was first used by Pietro Bembo in his edition of _De Aetna_
(1496).[5] It was introduced into English in the 16th century in imitation of
French practice.[6]

Introduced by Geoffroy Tory (1529),[7] the apostrophe was used in place of a
vowel letter to indicate elision (as in _l'heure_ in place of _la heure_ ). It
was also frequently used in place of a final _e_ (which was still pronounced
at the time) when it was elided before a vowel, as in _un' heure_. Modern
French orthography has restored the spelling _une heure_.[8]

From the 16th century, following French practice, the apostrophe was used when
a vowel letter was omitted either because of incidental elision ( _I'm_ for _I
am_ ) or because the letter no longer represented a sound ( _lov'd_ for
_loved_ ). English spelling retained many inflections that were not pronounced
as syllables, notably verb endings ( _-est, -eth, -es, -ed_ ) and the noun
ending _-es_ , which marked either plurals or possessives (also known as
genitives; see Possessive apostrophe, below). So an apostrophe followed by _s_
was often used to mark a plural, especially when the noun was a loan word (and
especially a word ending in _a_ , as in _the two comma's_ ).[6]

The use of elision has continued to the present day, but significant changes
have been made to the possessive and plural uses. By the 18th century,
apostrophe + _s_ was regularly used for all possessive singular forms, even
when the letter _e_ was not omitted (as in _the gate's height_ ). This was
regarded as representing the Old English genitive singular inflection _-es_.
The plural use was greatly reduced, but a need was felt to mark possessive
plural. The solution was to use an apostrophe after the plural _s_ (as in
_girls' dresses_ ). However, this was not universally accepted until the
mid-19th century.[6]

The apostrophe is used in English to indicate what is, for historical reasons,
misleadingly called the possessive case in the English language. This case was
called the genitive until the 18th century and (like the genitive case in
other languages) does not always involve possession. For example, in the
phrase "little Roger's headmaster", little Roger does not own the headmaster;
in the phrase "tomorrow's weather", tomorrow does not/will not own the
weather.

In the words of Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of English Usage:[9]

The argument is a case of fooling oneself with one's own terminology. After
the 18th-century grammarians began to refer to the genitive case as the
possessive case, grammarians and other commentators got it into their heads
that the only use of the case was to show possession.... Simply changing the
name of the genitive does not change or eliminate any of its multiple
functions.

This dictionary also cites a study[10] that found that only 40% of the
possessive forms were used to indicate actual possession.[11]

The modern spelling convention distinguishes possessive singular forms (
_Bernadette's_ , _flower's_ , _glass's_ , _one's_ ) from simple plural forms (
_Bernadettes_ , _flowers_ , _glasses_ , _ones_ ), and both of those from
possessive plural forms ( _Bernadettes'_ , _flowers'_ , _glasses'_ , _ones'_
).

For singular forms, the modern possessive or genitive inflection is a survival
from certain genitive inflections in Old English, for which the apostrophe
originally marked the loss of the old _e_ (for example, _lambes_ became
_lamb's_ ). Until the 18th century, the apostrophe was extensively used to
indicate plural forms. Its use for indicating plural "possessive" forms was
not standard before the middle of the 19th century.

**Summary of rules for most situations**

**Basic rule (singular nouns)**

For most singular nouns the ending _'s_ is added; e.g., _the cat's whiskers_.

**Basic rule (plural nouns)**

When the noun is a normal plural, with an added _s_ , no extra _s_ is added in
the possessive; so _the neighbours' garden_ (where there is more than one
neighbour) is standard rather than _the neighbours's garden_.

**Basic rule (compound nouns)**

Compound nouns have their singular possessives formed with an apostrophe and
an added _s_ , in accordance with the rules given above: _the Attorney-
General's husband_ ; _theLord Warden of the Cinque Ports's prerogative_; _this
Minister for Justice's intervention_ ; _her father-in-law's new wife_.

**Joint or separate possession**

For two nouns (or noun phrases) joined by _and_ , there are several ways of
expressing possession, including:

Some grammars make no distinction in meaning between the two forms.[note 2]
Some publishers' style guides, however, make a distinction, assigning the
"segregatory" (or "distributive") meaning to the form "John's and Mary's" and
the "combinatorial" (or "joint") meaning to the form "John and Mary's".[note
3] A third alternative is a construction of the form "Jack's children and
Jill's", which is always distributive, i.e. it designates the combined set of
Jack's children and Jill's children.[15]

When a coordinate possessive construction has two personal pronouns, the
normal possessive inflection is used, and there is no apostrophe (e.g. "his
and her children"). The issue of the use of the apostrophe arises when the
coordinate construction includes a noun (phrase) and a pronoun. In this case,
the inflection of only the last item may sometimes be, at least marginally,
acceptable ("you and your spouse's bank account").[15][16] The inflection of
both is normally preferred (e.g. Jack's and your dogs), but there is a
tendency to avoid this construction, too, in favour of a construction that
does not use a coordinate possessive (e.g. by using "Jack's letters and
yours").[15] Where a construction like "Jack's and your dogs" is used, the
interpretation is usually "segregatory" (i.e. not joint possession).[16]

**With other punctuation; compounds with pronouns**

If the word or compound includes, or even ends with, a punctuation mark, an
apostrophe and an _s_ are still added in the usual way: "Westward Ho!'s
railway station"; " _Awaye!_ 's Paulette Whitten recorded Bob Wilson's
story";[20] _Washington, D.C.'s museums_[21] (assuming that the prevailing
style requires full stops in _D.C.)._

**Time, money, and similar**

An apostrophe is used in time and money references in constructions such as
_one hour's respite_ , _two weeks' holiday_ , _a dollar's worth_ , _five
pounds' worth_ , _one mile's drive from here_. This is like an ordinary
possessive use. For example, _one hour's respite_ means _a respite of one
hour_ (exactly as _the cat's whiskers_ means _the whiskers of the cat_ ).
Exceptions are accounted for in the same way: _three months pregnant_ (in
modern usage, one says neither _pregnant of three months_ , nor _one month(')s
pregnant_ ).

**Possessive pronouns and adjectives**

No apostrophe is used in the following possessive pronouns and adjectives:
_yours_ , _his_ , _hers_ , _ours_ , _its_ , _theirs_ , and _whose_.

The possessive of _it_ was originally _it's_ , and it is a common mistake
today to write it this way, though the apostrophe was dropped by the early
1800s and authorities are now unanimous that _it's_ can be only a contraction
of _it is_ or _it has_.[22][note 6]

All other possessive pronouns ending in _s_ do take an apostrophe: _one's_ ;
_everyone's_ ; _somebody's_ , _nobody else's_ , etc. With plural forms, the
apostrophe follows the _s_ , as with nouns: _the others' husbands_ (but
compare _They all looked at each other's husbands_ , in which both _each_ and
_other_ are singular).

**Importance for disambiguation**

Each of these four phrases (listed in Steven Pinker's _The Language Instinct_
) has a distinct meaning:

Kingsley Amis, on being challenged to produce a sentence whose meaning
depended on a possessive apostrophe, came up with:

Some singular nouns are pronounced with a sibilant sound at the end: /s/ or
/z/. The spelling of these ends with _-s_ , _-se_ , _-z_ , _-ze_ , _-ce_ ,
_-x_ , or _-xe_.

Many respected authorities recommend that practically all singular nouns,
including those ending with a sibilant sound, have possessive forms with an
extra _s_ after the apostrophe so that the spelling reflects the underlying
pronunciation. Examples include Oxford University Press, the Modern Language
Association, the BBC and _The Economist_.[24] Such authorities demand
possessive singulars like these: _Senator Jones's umbrella_ ; _Tony Adams's
friend; my boss's job; the US's economy_. Rules that modify or extend the
standard principle have included the following:

Although less common, some contemporary writers still follow the older
practice of omitting the second _s_ in all cases ending with a sibilant, but
usually not when written _-x_ or _-xe_.[30] Some contemporary authorities such
as the Associated Press Stylebook[31] recommend or allow the practice of
omitting the additional "s" in all words ending with an "s", but not in words
ending with other sibilants ("z" and "x").[32] The 15th edition of _The
Chicago Manual of Style_ had recommended the traditional practice, which
included providing for several exceptions to accommodate spoken usage such as
the omission of the extra _s_ after a polysyllabic word ending in a sibilant,
but the 16th edition no longer recommends omitting the possessive "s".[33]

Similar examples of notable names ending in an _s_ that are often given a
possessive apostrophe with no additional _s_ include _Dickens_ and _Williams_.
There is often a policy of leaving off the additional _s_ on any such name,
but this can prove problematic when specific names are contradictory (for
example, _St James' Park_ in Newcastle [the football ground] and the area of
_St. James's Park_ in London). However, debate has been going on regarding the
punctuation of St James' Park (Newcastle) for some time, unlike St James's
Park (London) which is the less contentious version. For more details on
practice with geographic names, see the relevant section below.

Some writers like to reflect standard spoken practice in cases like these with
_sake_ : _for convenience' sake_ , _for goodness' sake_ , _for appearance'
sake_ , _for compromise' sake_ , etc. This punctuation is preferred in major
style guides. Others prefer to add _'s_ : _for convenience's sake_.[34] Still
others prefer to omit the apostrophe when there is an _s_ sound before _sake_
: _for morality's sake_ , but _for convenience sake_.[35]

The Supreme Court of the United States is split on whether a possessive
singular noun that ends with _s_ should always have an additional _s_ after
the apostrophe, sometimes have an additional _s_ after the apostrophe (for
instance, based on whether the final sound of the original word is pronounced
/s/ or /z/), or never have an additional _s_ after the apostrophe. The
informal majority view (5–4, based on past writings of the justices as of
2006[update]) favoured the additional _s_ , but a strong minority
disagrees.[36]

The English possessive of French nouns ending in a silent _s_ , _x_ , or _z_
is addressed by various style guides. Certainly a sibilant is pronounced in
examples like _Descartes's_ and _Dumas's_ ; the question addressed here is
whether _s_ needs to be added. Similar examples with _x_ or _z_ : _Sauce
Périgueux's main ingredient is truffle_ ; _Hispince-nez's loss went
unnoticed_; _"Verreaux('s) eagle, a large, predominantly black eagle,_ Aquila
verreauxi _,..."_ (OED, entry for "Verreaux", with silent _x_ ; see Verreaux's
eagle); in each of these some writers might omit the added _s_. The same
principles and residual uncertainties apply with "naturalised" English words,
like _Illinois_ and _Arkansas_.[37]

For possessive _plurals_ of words ending in a silent _x_ , _z_ or _s_ , the
few authorities that address the issue at all typically call for an added _s_
and suggest that the apostrophe precede the _s_ : _The Loucheux's homeland is
in the Yukon_ ; _Compare the two Dumas's literary achievements_.[note 7] The
possessive of a cited French title with a silent plural ending is uncertain: "
_Trois femmes_ 's long and complicated publication history",[38] but " _Les
noces_ ' singular effect was 'exotic primitive' ..." (with nearby sibilants
_-ce-_ in _noces_ and _s-_ in _singular_ ).[39] Compare treatment of other
titles, above.

Guides typically seek a principle that will yield uniformity, even for foreign
words that fit awkwardly with standard English punctuation.

Place names in the United States do not use the possessive apostrophe on
federal maps and signs.[40] The United States Board on Geographic Names, which
has responsibility for formal naming of municipalities and geographic
features, has deprecated the use of possessive apostrophes since 1890 so as
not to show ownership of the place.[40][41] Only five names of natural
features in the US are officially spelled with a genitive apostrophe: Martha's
Vineyard; Ike's Point, New Jersey; John E's Pond, Rhode Island; Carlos Elmer's
Joshua View, Arizona; and Clark's Mountain, Oregon.[41][42] Some
municipalities, originally incorporated using the apostrophe, have dropped it
in accordance with this policy; Taylors Falls in Minnesota, for example, was
originally incorporated as "Taylor's Falls".[43]

Australia's Intergovernmental Committee on Surveying and Mapping also has a
no-apostrophe policy, a practice it says goes back to the 1900s[44] and which
is generally followed around the country.[45]

On the other hand, the United Kingdom has Bishop's Stortford, Bishop's Castle
and King's Lynn (among many others) but St Albans, St Andrews and St Helens.
London Underground's Piccadilly line has the adjacent stations of Earl's Court
in Earls Court and Barons Court. These names were mainly fixed in form many
years before grammatical rules were fully standardised. While Newcastle United
play football at a stadium called St James' Park, and Exeter City at St James
Park, London has a St James's Park (this whole area of London is named after
the parish of St James's Church, Piccadilly[46]).

Modern usage has been influenced by considerations of technological
convenience including the economy of typewriter ribbons and films, and similar
computer character "disallowance" which tend to ignore past standards.[47]
Practice in the United Kingdom and Canada is not so uniform.[48]

Sometimes the apostrophe is omitted in the names of clubs, societies, and
other organizations, even though the standard principles seem to require it:
_Country Women's Association_ , but _International Aviation Womens
Association_ ;[49] _Magistrates' Court of Victoria_ ,[50] but _Federated Ship
Painters and Dockers Union_. Usage is variable and inconsistent. Style guides
typically advise consulting an official source for the standard form of the
name (as one would do if uncertain about other aspects of the spelling of the
name); some tend towards greater prescriptiveness, for or against such an
apostrophe.[note 8] As the case of _womens_ shows, it is not possible to
analyze these forms simply as non-possessive plurals, since _women_ is the
only correct plural form of _woman_.

Where a business name is based on a family name it should in theory take an
apostrophe, but many leave it out (contrast _Sainsbury's_ with _Harrods_ ). In
recent times there has been an increasing tendency to drop the apostrophe.
Names based on a first name are more likely to take an apostrophe, but this is
not always the case. Some business names may inadvertently spell a different
name if the name with an _s_ at the end is also a name, such as Parson. A
small activist group called the Apostrophe Protection Society[51] has
campaigned for large retailers such as Harrods, Currys, and Selfridges to
reinstate their missing punctuation. A spokesperson for Barclays PLC stated,
"It has just disappeared over the years. Barclays is no longer associated with
the family name."[52] Further confusion can be caused by businesses whose
names look as if they should be pronounced differently without an apostrophe,
such as Paulos Circus, and other companies that leave the apostrophe out of
their logos but include it in written text, such as Cadwalader's.

An apostrophe is commonly used to indicate omitted characters, normally
letters:

The apostrophe may be used for clarity with the plurals of single letters as
in

Use of the apostrophe may be recommended only for lowercase letters.[57] On
the other hand, some style manuals and critics suggest that apostrophes should
never be used for plurals, even for lower case letters.[58] APA style requires
that one write: _p_ s, _n_ s, etc.[59]

An apostrophe is used by some writers to form a plural for abbreviations,
initials including acronyms, and symbols, especially where adding just _s_
rather than ' _s_ may leave meaning ambiguous or presentation inelegant. Some
specific cases:

For abbreviations, acronyms, etc., use of _s_ without an apostrophe is now
more common than its use with an apostrophe, but for single lowercase letters,
pluralization with _'s_ is usual.[65][66][67]

Names that are not strictly native to English sometimes have an apostrophe
substituted to represent other characters (see also As a mark of elision,
below).

In transliterated foreign words, an apostrophe may be used to separate letters
or syllables that otherwise would likely be interpreted incorrectly. For
example:

Furthermore, an apostrophe may be used to indicate a glottal stop in
transliterations. For example:

Rather than ʿ the apostrophe is sometimes used to indicate a voiced pharyngeal
fricative as it sounds and looks like the glottal stop to most English
speakers. For example:

If you have a name that ends in "s," or if you will observe home-made signs
selling tomatoes or chili-and-beans, you will quickly note what can be done
with a possessive apostrophe in reckless hands.

Failure to observe standard use of the apostrophe is widespread and frequently
criticised as incorrect,[71][72] often generating heated debate. The British
founder of the Apostrophe Protection Society earned a 2001 Ig Nobel prize for
"efforts to protect, promote and defend the differences between plural and
possessive".[73] A 2004 report by British examination board OCR stated that
"the inaccurate use of the apostrophe is so widespread as to be almost
universal".[74] A 2008 survey found that nearly half of the UK adults polled
were unable to use the apostrophe correctly.[72]

Apostrophes used in a non-standard manner to form noun plurals are known as
_greengrocers' apostrophes_ or _grocers' apostrophes_ , often written as
_greengrocer's apostrophes_[75] or _grocer's apostrophes_.[76] They are
sometimes humorously called _greengrocers apostrophe's_ , _rogue apostrophes_
, or _idiot's apostrophes_ (a literal translation of the German word
_Deppenapostroph_ , which criticises the misapplication of apostrophes in
Denglisch). The practice, once common and acceptable (see Historical
development), comes from the identical sound of the plural and possessive
forms of most English nouns. It is often criticised as a form of
hypercorrection coming from a widespread ignorance of the proper use of the
apostrophe or of punctuation in general. Lynne Truss, author of _Eats, Shoots&
Leaves_, points out that before the 19th century it was standard orthography
to use the apostrophe to form a plural of a foreign-sounding word that ended
in a vowel (e. g., _banana's_ , _folio's_ , _logo's_ , _quarto's_ , _pasta's_
, _ouzo's_ ) to clarify pronunciation. Truss says this usage is no longer
considered proper in formal writing.[77]

The term is believed to have been coined in the middle of the 20th century by
a teacher of languages working in Liverpool, at a time when such mistakes were
common in the handwritten signs and advertisements of greengrocers (e. g.,
_Apple's1/- a pound, Orange's 1/6d a pound_). Some have argued that its use in
mass communication by employees of well-known companies has led to the less
literate assuming it to be standard and adopting the habit themselves.[78]

The same use of apostrophe before noun plural -s forms is sometimes made by
non-native speakers of English. For example, in Dutch, the apostrophe is
inserted before the _s_ when pluralising most words ending in a vowel or _y_
for example, _baby's_ (English _babies_ ) and _radio's_ (English _radios_ ).
This often produces so-called "Dunglish" errors when carried over into
English.[79] Hyperforeignism has been formalised in some pseudo-anglicisms.
For example, the French word _pin's_ (from English _pin_ ) is used (with the
apostrophe in both singular and plural) for collectible lapel pins. Similarly,
there is an Andorran football club called FC Rànger's (after such British
clubs as Rangers F.C.) and a Japanese dance group called Super Monkey's.

In the UK there is a tendency to drop apostrophes in many commonly used names
such as St Annes, St Johns Lane,[80] and so on.

In 2009, a resident in Royal Tunbridge Wells was accused of vandalism by one
neighbour after he painted apostrophes on road signs that had spelled the
street name as _St Johns Close_.[81]

UK supermarket chain Tesco omits the mark where standard practice would
require it. Signs in Tesco advertise (among other items) "mens magazines",
"girls toys", "kids books" and "womens shoes". In his book _Troublesome Words_
, author Bill Bryson lambastes Tesco for this, stating that "the mistake is
inexcusable, and those who make it are linguistic Neanderthals."[82]

In the USA, the United States Board on Geographic Names discourages the use of
possessive apostrophes in geographic names (see above).[83]

George Bernard Shaw, a proponent of English spelling reform on phonetic
principles, argued that the apostrophe was mostly redundant. He did not use it
for spelling _cant_ , _hes_ , etc., in many of his writings. He did, however,
allow _I'm_ and _it's_.[84] Hubert Selby Jr. used a slash instead of an
apostrophe mark for contractions and did not use an apostrophe at all for
possessives. Lewis Carroll made greater use of apostrophes, and frequently
used _sha'n't_ , with an apostrophe in place of the elided _ll_ as well as the
more usual _o_.[85][86] These authors' usages have not become widespread.

The British pop group Hear'Say famously made unconventional use of an
apostrophe in its name. Truss comments that "the naming of Hear'Say in 2001
was [...] a significant milestone on the road to punctuation anarchy".[87]
Dexys Midnight Runners, on the other hand, omit the apostrophe (though _Dexys_
could possibly be understood as a plural form of _Dexy_ , rather than a
possessive form).

The apostrophe in the name of rock band The La's is often thought to be
misused, but in fact it marks omission of the letter _d_. The name comes from
the Scouse slang for _lads_.

The over-use of apostrophes in names in fantasy literature was satirised by
Neal Stephenson in _Reamde_.

Over the years, the use of apostrophes has been criticised. George Bernard
Shaw called them "uncouth bacilli", referring to the apostrophe-like shape of
many bacteria. The author and language commentator Anu Garg, in a humorous but
well-argued discussion, has called for the abolition of the apostrophe,
stating "Some day this world would be free of metastatic cancers, narcissistic
con men, and the apostrophe."[88] In his book _American Speech_ , linguist
Steven Byington stated of the apostrophe that "the language would be none the
worse for its abolition". Adrian Room, in his _English Journal_ article "Axing
the Apostrophe", argued that apostrophes are unnecessary, and context will
resolve any ambiguity.[89] In a letter to the _English Journal_ , Peter Brodie
stated that apostrophes are "largely decorative ... [and] rarely clarify
meaning".[90] John C. Wells, emeritus professor of phonetics at University
College London, says the apostrophe is "a waste of time".[89]

In many languages, especially European languages, the apostrophe is used to
indicate the elision of one or more sounds, as in English.

Several languages and transliteration systems use the apostrophe or some
similar mark to indicate a glottal stop, sometimes considering it a letter of
the alphabet:

The apostrophe represents sounds resembling the glottal stop in the Turkic
languages and in some romanizations of Semitic languages, including Arabic and
Hebrew. In typography, this function may be performed by the closing single
quotation mark. In that case, the letter _'ayn_ (Arabic ع and Hebrew ע) is
correspondingly transliterated with the opening single quotation mark.

Some languages and transliteration systems use the apostrophe to mark the
presence, or the lack of, palatalization:

Some languages use the apostrophe to separate the root of a word and its
affixes, especially if the root is foreign and unassimilated. (For another
kind of morphemic separation see pinyin, below.)

The form of the apostrophe originates in manuscript writing, as a point with a
downwards tail curving clockwise. This form was inherited by the _typographic
apostrophe_ ( ’ ), also known as the _typeset apostrophe_, or, informally, the
_curly apostrophe_. Later sans-serif typefaces had stylised apostrophes with a
more geometric or simplified form, but usually retaining the same directional
bias as a closing quotation mark.

With the invention of the typewriter, a "neutral" quotation mark form ( ' )
was created to economize on the keyboard, by using a single key to represent:
the apostrophe, both opening and closing single quotation marks, single
primes, and on some typewriters the exclamation point by overprinting with a
period. This is known as the _typewriter apostrophe_ or _vertical apostrophe_.
The same convention was adopted for quotation marks.

Both simplifications carried over to computer keyboards and the ASCII
character set. However, although these are widely used due to their ubiquity
and convenience, they are deprecated in contexts where proper typography is
important.[101]

Unicode defines three apostrophe characters:[4]

Characters similar to apostrophe:

The typewriter apostrophe ( ' ) was inherited by computer keyboards, and is
the only apostrophe character available in the (7-bit) ASCII character
encoding, at code value 0x27 (39). As such, it is a highly overloaded
character. In ASCII, it represents a left single quotation mark, right single
quotation mark, apostrophe, vertical line or prime (punctuation marks), or an
acute accent (modifier letters).

Many earlier (pre-1985) computer displays and printers rendered the ASCII
apostrophe as a typographic apostrophe, and rendered the ASCII grave accent (
**`** ) U+0060 as a matching left single quotation mark. This allowed a more
typographic appearance of text: ```I can't''` would appear as `‘‘I can’t’’` on
these systems. This can still be seen in many documents prepared at that time,
and is still used in the TeX typesetting system to create typographic quotes.

Support for the typographic apostrophe ( ’ ) was introduced in several 8-bit
character encodings, such as the Apple Macintosh operating system's Mac Roman
character set (in 1984), and later in the CP1252 encoding of Microsoft
Windows. Both sets also used this code point for a closing single quote. There
is no such character in ISO 8859-1.

The Microsoft Windows code page CP1252 (sometimes incorrectly called _ANSI_ or
_ISO-Latin_ ) contains the typographic apostrophe at 0x92. Due to "smart
quotes" in Microsoft software converting the ASCII apostrophe to this value,
other software makers have been effectively forced to adopt this as a _de
facto_ convention. For instance, the HTML5 standard specifies that this value
is interpreted as this character from CP1252.[105] Some earlier non-Microsoft
browsers would display a '?' for this and make web pages composed with
Microsoft software somewhat hard to read.

Although ubiquitous in typeset material, the typographic apostrophe ( ’ ) is
rather difficult to enter on a computer, since it does not have its own key on
a standard keyboard. Outside the world of professional typesetting and graphic
design, many people do not know how to enter this character and instead use
the typewriter apostrophe ( ' ). The typewriter apostrophe has always been
considered tolerable on Web pages because of the egalitarian nature of Web
publishing, the low resolution of computer monitors in comparison to print,
and legacy limitations provided by ASCII.

More recently, the standard use of the typographic apostrophe is becoming more
common on the Web due to the wide adoption of the Unicode text encoding
standard, higher-resolution displays, and advanced anti-aliasing of text in
modern operating systems. Because typewriter apostrophes are now often
automatically converted to typographic apostrophes by word processing and
desktop publishing software, the typographic apostrophe does often appear in
documents produced by non-professionals, albeit sometimes incorrectly—see the
section "Smart Quotes" below.

`Compose``'``>` _or_  
`Ctrl`+`⇧ Shift`+`U``2``0``1``9``↵ Enter`[106]

XML (and hence XHTML) defines an `&apos;` character entity reference for the
ASCII typewriter apostrophe. `&apos;` is officially supported in HTML since
HTML 5. It is _not_ defined in HTML 4[107] despite all the other predefined
character entities from XML being defined. If it cannot be entered literally
in HTML, a numeric character reference could be used instead, such as `&#x27;`
or `&#39;`.

In the HTML entity `&rsquo;` the _rsquo_ is short for **r** ight **s** ingle
**quo** tation mark.

To make typographic apostrophes easier to enter, word processing and
publishing software often convert typewriter apostrophes to typographic
apostrophes during text entry (at the same time converting opening and closing
single and double quotes to their standard left-handed or right-handed forms).
A similar facility may be offered on web servers after submitting text in a
form field, e.g. on weblogs or free encyclopedias. This is known as the _smart
quotes_ feature; apostrophes and quotation marks that are not automatically
altered by computer programs are known as _dumb quotes_.

Such conversion is not always correct. Smart quotes features often incorrectly
convert a leading apostrophe to an opening quotation mark (e.g., in
abbreviations of years: _‘ 29_ rather than the correct _’ 29_ for the years
_1929_ or _2029_ (depending on context); or _‘ twas_ instead of _’ twas_ as
the archaic abbreviation of _it was_ ). Smart quote features also often fail
to recognise situations when a prime rather than an apostrophe is needed; for
example, incorrectly rendering the latitude 49° 53′ 08″ as 49° 53’ 08".

In Microsoft Word it is possible to turn smart quotes off (in some versions,
by navigating through _Tools_ , _AutoCorrect_ , _AutoFormat as you type_ , and
then unchecking the appropriate option). Alternatively, typing Control-Z (for
_Undo_ ) immediately after entering the apostrophe will convert it back to a
typewriter apostrophe. In Microsoft Word for Windows, holding down the Control
key while typing two apostrophes will produce a single typographic apostrophe.

Some programming languages, like Pascal, use the ASCII apostrophe to delimit
string literals. In many languages, including JavaScript, ECMAScript, and
Python, either the apostrophe or the double quote may be used, allowing string
literals to contain the other character (but not to contain both without using
an escape character), e.g. `foo = 'He said "Bar!"';`. Strings delimited with
apostrophes are often called _single quoted_. Some languages, such as Perl,
PHP, and many shell languages, treat single quoted strings as "raw" strings,
while double quoted strings have expressions (such as "$variable") replaced
with their values when interpreted.

The C programming language (and many derived languages like C++, Java, C#, and
Scala) uses apostrophes to delimit a character literal. In these languages a
character is a different object than a one-letter string.

In C++, since C++14, apostrophes are also used as digit separators in numeric
literals.

In Visual Basic (and earlier Microsoft BASIC dialects such as QuickBASIC) an
apostrophe is used to denote the start of a comment.[note 11]

In the Lisp family of programming languages, an apostrophe is shorthand for
the `quote` operator.

In Rust, in addition to being used to delimit a character literal, an
apostrophe can start an explicit lifetime.

