The **Arabic chat alphabet** , _**Arabizi**_[1] (عربيزي, _Arabīzī_ ),
**Franco-Arabic** (فرانكو آراب, _franco-arabe_ , or عرنسية),[2] **Arabish** ,
**Araby** (Arabic: عربي‎, _Arabī_ ), and **Mu'arrab** (معرب), refer to the
Romanized alphabets for informal Arabic dialects in which Arabic script is
transcribed or encoded into a combination of Latin script and Arabic numerals.
These informal chat alphabets were originally used primarily by youth in the
Arab world in very informal settings—especially for communicating over the
Internet or for sending messages via cellular phones—though use is not
necessarily restricted by age anymore and these chat alphabets have been used
in other media such as advertising.[3][4]

These chat alphabets differ from more formal and academic Arabic
transliteration systems, in that they use numerals and multigraphs instead of
diacritics for letters such as Qoph (ق) or Ḍād (ض) that do not exist in the
basic Latin script (ASCII), and in that what is being transcribed is an
informal dialect and not Standard Arabic.[4] These Arabic chat alphabets also
differ from each other, as each is influenced by the particular phonology of
the Arabic dialect being transcribed and the orthography of the dominant
European language in the area—typically the language of the former colonists,
and typically either French or English.

Because of their widespread use, including in public advertisements by large
multinational companies, large players in the online industry like Google and
Microsoft have introduced tools that convert text written in Arabish to Arabic
(Google Translate and Microsoft Translator). Add-ons for Mozilla Firefox and
Chrome also exist (Panlatin[5] and ARABEASY Keyboard [6]). The Arabic chat
alphabet is never used in formal settings and is rarely, if ever, used for
long communications.[3]

During the last decades of the 20th century, Western text-based communication
technologies, such as mobile phone text messaging, the World Wide Web, email,
bulletin board systems, IRC, and instant messaging became increasingly
prevalent in the Arab world. Most of these technologies originally permitted
the use of the Latin script only, and some still lack support for displaying
Arabic script. As a result, Arabic-speaking users frequently transliterate
Arabic text into Latin script when using these technologies to communicate.[7]

To handle those Arabic letters that do not have an approximate phonetic
equivalent in the Latin script, numerals and other characters were
appropriated. For example, the numeral "3" is used to represent the Arabic
letter ⟨ع⟩ ( _ _ʿayn__ )—note the choice of a visually similar character, with
the numeral resembling a mirrored version of the Arabic letter. Many users of
mobile phones and computers use Arabish even though their system is capable of
displaying Arabic script. This may be due to a lack of an appropriate keyboard
layout for Arabic, or because users are already more familiar with the QWERTY
or AZERTY keyboard layout.

Online communication systems, such as IRC, bulletin board systems, and blogs,
are often run on systems or over protocols that do not support code pages or
alternate character sets. Thus, the Arabic chat alphabet has become
commonplace. It can be seen even in domain names, like Qal3ah.

Because of the informal nature of this system, there is no single "correct" or
"official" usage. There may be some overlap in the way various letters are
transliterated.

Most of the characters in the system make use of the Latin character (as used
in English and French) that best approximates phonetically the Arabic letter
that one would otherwise use (for example, ب corresponds to _b_ ). Regional
variations in the pronunciation of an Arabic letter can also produce some
variation in its transliteration (e.g. ﺝ might be transliterated as _j_ by a
speaker of the Levantine dialect, or as _g_ by a speaker of the Egyptian
dialect).[8]

Those letters that do not have a close phonetic approximation in the Latin
script are often expressed using numerals or other characters, so that the
numeral graphically approximates the Arabic letter that one would otherwise
use (e.g. ع is represented using the numeral _3_ because the latter looks like
a vertical reflection of the former).

Since many letters are distinguished from others solely by a dot above or
below the main portion of the character, the transliterations of these letters
frequently use the same letter or number with an apostrophe added before or
after (e.g. ' _3_ is used to represent غ).

Each of the different varieties of Arabic chat alphabets is influenced by the
particular phonology of the Arabic dialect being transcribed and the
orthography of the dominant European language in the area—typically the
language of the former colonists. Below are some examples of Arabic chat
alphabet varieties.

The frequent use of _y_ and _w_ to represent ي and و demonstrates the
influence of English orthography on the romanization of Egyptian Arabic. As
was the case in other parts of the region, English became the primary European
language in Egypt as a result of British colonialism in the first half of the
20th century.[9]

Additionally, the letter Qoph (ق) is usually pronounced as a glottal stop,
like a Hamza (ء) in Metropolitan (Cairene) Egyptian Arabic—unlike Standard
Arabic in which it represents a voiceless uvular stop. Therefore, in Egyptian
_Arabizi_ , the numeral 2 can represent either a Hamza or a Qoph pronounced as
a glottal stop.

انا رايح الجامعه الساعه 3 العصر

الجو عامل ايه النهارده فى إسكندرية؟

 _Lebanese, Syrian, Jordanian, Palestinian _

The use of ch to represent ش demonstrates the influence of French orthography
on the romanization of Moroccan Arabic or Darija. French became the primary
European language in Morocco as a result of French colonialism.[10]

One of the characteristics of Franco-Arabic as it's used to transcribe Darija
is the presence of long consonant clusters that are typically unorthodox in
other languages. These clusters represents the deletion of short vowels and
the syllabification of medial consonants in the phonology of Darija, a feature
shared with and derived from Amazigh languages.

كيفاش داير في القراية؟

شلونك؟ شنو قاعد تسوي الحين؟

عليمن يا قلُب تعتب عليمن؟

ولاي مشتاق ليك شديد يا زول كيفك إنتا؟ انا الحمدلله اكنت داير امشي المحل داك
فوق النيل، المكان قريب من بيتك. حاستناك في الكبري.

بوه ياخي، إتَ عفة؟ ولله سمح انا ماشي للسوبرمارشة ديك بي وسط نجامينا لو تدور
تمشي يعني، تعال معاي يلا ياخي

The phenomenon of writing Arabic with these improvised chat alphabets has
drawn sharp rebuke from a number of different segments of Arabic-speaking
communities. While educators and members of the intelligentsia mourn the
deterioration and degradation of the standard, literary, academic
language,[11] conservative Muslims, as well as Pan-Arabists and some Arab-
nationalists, view the Arabic Chat Alphabet as a detrimental form of
Westernization. Arabic chat alphabets emerged amid a growing trend among Arab
youth, from Morocco to Iraq, to incorporate former colonial
languages—especially English and French—into Arabic through code switching or
as a form of slang. These improvised chat alphabets are used to replace Arabic
script, and this raises concerns regarding the preservation of the quality of
the language.[2]

