**Arthur William Matthew** " **Art** " **Carney** (November 4, 1918 – November
9, 2003) was an American actor in film, stage, television and radio. He is
best known for playing sewer worker Ed Norton opposite Jackie Gleason's Ralph
Kramden in the sitcom _The Honeymooners_ , and for winning the Academy Award
for Best Actor for his role in _Harry and Tonto_.[1]

Carney, youngest of six sons (Jack, Ned, Robert, Fred, Phil, and Art) was born
in Mount Vernon, New York, the son of Helen (née Farrell) and Edward Michael
Carney, who was a newspaper man and publicist.[2] His family was Irish
American and Roman Catholic.[3] He attended A. B. Davis High School.[4] Carney
was drafted into the United States Army as an infantryman and machine gun
crewman during World War II. During the Battle of Normandy serving in the 28th
Infantry Division, he was wounded in the leg by shrapnel and walked with a
limp for the rest of his life. As a result of the injury, his right leg was
3/4-inch shorter than his left.[5]

Carney was a comic singer with the Horace Heidt orchestra, which was heard
often on radio during the 1930s, notably on the hugely successful _Pot o'
Gold_ , the first big-money giveaway show in 1939–41. Carney's film career
began with an uncredited role in _Pot o' Gold_ (1941), the radio program's
spin-off feature film, playing a member of Heidt's band. Carney, a gifted
mimic, worked steadily in radio during the 1940s, playing character roles and
impersonating celebrities such as President Franklin D. Roosevelt and Winston
Churchill. In 1941 he was the house comic on the big band remote series,
_Matinee at Meadowbrook_.

One of his radio roles during the 1940s was the first Red Lantern on _Land of
the Lost_. In 1943 he played Billy Oldham on _Joe and Ethel Turp_ , based on
Damon Runyon stories. He appeared on _The Henry Morgan Show_ in 1946–47. He
impersonated FDR on _The March of Time_ and Dwight D. Eisenhower on _Living
1948_. In 1950–51 he played Montague's father on _The Magnificent Montague_.
He was a supporting player on _Casey, Crime Photographer_ and _Gang Busters_.

On both the radio and television versions of _The Morey Amsterdam Show_
(1948–50), Carney's character Charlie the doorman became known for his
catchphrase, "Ya know what I mean?"

In 1950, Jackie Gleason was starring in a New York–based comedy-variety
series, _Cavalcade of Stars_ , and played many different characters. Gleason's
regular characters included Charlie Bratten, a lunchroom loudmouth who
insisted on spoiling a neighboring patron's meal. Carney, established in New
York as a reliable actor, played Bratten's mild-mannered victim, Clem Finch.
Gleason and Carney developed a good working chemistry, and Gleason recruited
Carney to appear in other sketches, including the domestic-comedy skits
featuring _The Honeymooners_. Carney gained lifelong fame for his portrayal of
sewer worker Ed Norton, opposite Jackie Gleason's Ralph Kramden. The success
of these skits resulted in the famous filmed situation comedy _The
Honeymooners_ , and the _Honeymooners_ revivals that followed. He was
nominated for seven Emmy Awards and won six.

On August 13, 1970, Elvis Presley recalled meeting Carney in early 1956, when
Presley was appearing on Jackie Gleason's _Stage Show (TV series)_. His
comments came during one of Presley's concert appearances at the International
Hotel in Las Vegas, Nevada. Presley introduced Carney in the audience during
his dinner show on that evening.[6]

Between his stints with Gleason, Carney worked steadily as a character actor
and occasionally in musical-variety. He guest-starred on NBC's _Henry Morgan's
Great Talent Hunt_ (1951), _The Martha Raye Show_ (1955–56), _The Dinah Shore
Chevy Show_ , and many others, including as a mystery guest on _What's My
Line?_ which he attended dressed as Ed Norton. Carney also had his own NBC
television variety show from 1959 to 1960. In the season two opening episodes
35 and 36 of the _Batman_ television series, titled "Shoot a Crooked Arrow"
and "Walk the Straight and Narrow" (1966), Carney gave a memorable performance
as the newly introduced villain "The Archer".

In 1958, he starred in an ABC children's television special _Art Carney Meets
Peter and the Wolf_ , which also featured the Bil Baird Marionettes. It
combined an original storyline with a marionette presentation of Serge
Prokofiev's _Peter and the Wolf_. Some of Prokofiev's other music was given
lyrics written by Ogden Nash. The special was a success and was repeated
twice.

Carney starred in a classic Christmas episode of _The Twilight Zone_ , "The
Night of the Meek", playing a dramatic turn as an alcoholic department store
Santa Claus who later becomes the real thing. In 1964, he guest-starred in the
episode "Smelling Like a Rose" along with Hal March and Tina Louise in the CBS
drama _Mr. Broadway_ , starring Craig Stevens.

In 1970 Carney appeared as Skeet in "The Men From Shiloh" (the rebranded name
of _The Virginian_ ) in the episode titled "With Love, Bullets and
Valentines." In the early 1970s, Carney sang and danced on several episodes of
_The Dean Martin Show_ , took part in the Dean Martin Celebrity Roast of his
old co-star Jackie Gleason, and appeared as both Santa Claus and his wannabe
kidnapper Cosmo Scam in the 1970 Muppets Christmas TV special _The Great Santa
Claus Switch_.[7][8] He was also a guest star on _The Carol Burnett Show_ in
January 1971.

He starred as Police Chief Paul Lanigan in a 1976 television movie, _Lanigan's
Rabbi_ , and in the short-lived series of the same name that aired in 1977, as
part of the _NBC Sunday Mystery Movie_ lineup.[9]

In 1978, Carney appeared in _Star Wars Holiday Special_ , a made-for-TV movie
that was linked to the _Star Wars_ film series. In it, he played Trader Saun
Dann, a member of the Rebel Alliance who helped Chewbacca and his family evade
an Imperial blockade. The same year, he appeared as the father of Ringo
Starr's alter ego "Ognir Rrats" in the made for television special "Ringo". In
1980, he starred in the TV film _Alcatraz: The Whole Shocking Story_. In 1984,
he portrayed Santa Claus in the made-for-TV holiday film _The Night They Saved
Christmas_. Among his final television roles were a series of commercials for
Diet Coke in which he played a man enjoying a day out with his grandson.

Carney recorded prolifically in the 1950s for Columbia Records. Two of his
hits were "The Song of the Sewer", sung in character as Norton, and "'Twas the
Night Before Christmas", a spoken-word record in which Carney, accompanied
only by a jazz drummer, recited the famous Yuletide poem in syncopation. Some
of Carney's recordings were comedy-novelty songs, but most were silly songs
intended especially for children.

He also narrated a version of _The Wizard of Oz_ for Golden Records, with
Mitch Miller and his chorus performing four of the songs from the classic 1939
film version.

Carney won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his 1974 performance as Harry
Coombes, an elderly man going on the road with his pet cat, in _Harry and
Tonto_. He beat out Albert Finney, Dustin Hoffman, Jack Nicholson, and Al
Pacino for the Oscar that year. It was presented to him at the 47th Academy
Awards on April 8, 1975 by actress Glenda Jackson, with whom Carney would co-
star in the comedy _House Calls_ in 1978. Carney also won a Golden Globe award
for his _Harry and Tonto_ performance.

In demand in Hollywood after that, Carney then appeared in such films as _W.W.
and the Dixie Dancekings_ (as a deranged preacher), _The Late Show_ (as an
aging detective), _House Calls_ (as a senile chief surgeon), _Movie Movie_ (in
multiple roles) and _Going in Style_ (as a bored senior citizen who joins in
bank robberies). Later movies included _The Muppets Take Manhattan_ , the
crime drama _The Naked Face_ and the sci-fi thriller _Firestarter_.

In 1981, he portrayed Harry Truman, an 83-year-old lodge owner in the semi-
fictional account of events leading to the eruption of Mount St. Helens, in
the movie titled _St. Helens_. Although he retired in the late 1980s, he
returned in 1993 in a minor supporting role in the Arnold Schwarzenegger film,
_Last Action Hero_.

Carney made his Broadway debut in 1957 as the lead in _The Rope Dancers_ with
Siobhan McKenna, a drama by Morton Wishengrad. His subsequent Broadway
appearances included his portrayal in 1965–67 of Felix Unger in _The Odd
Couple_ (opposite Walter Matthau and then Jack Klugman as Oscar). In 1969 he
was nominated for a Tony Award for his performance in Brian Friel's _Lovers_.
In 1961-62, Art Carney played Frank Michaelson in an English comedy by Phoebe
& Henry Ephron entitled _Take Her, She's Mine_ with Phyllis Thaxter as his co-
star in the Biltmore Theatre in New York; the character was played by James
Stewart in the 1963 film version.

Carney was married three times to two women: Jean Myers, from 1940 to 1965, to
Barbara Isaac from December 21, 1966 until 1977, and again to Jean Myers from
1980 until his death in 2003. He had three children from his first marriage to
Jean: Eileen (born 1942, died 2013), Brian (born 1946), and Paul (born 1952,
died 2017). Brian Carney appears as a GEICO executive alongside the animated
gecko in GEICO commercials. His grandson, State Representative Devin Carney,
represents Lyme, Old Lyme, Old Saybrook, and Westbrook in the Connecticut
General Assembly. His great-nephew is musician/actor Reeve Carney.

Carney died in his sleep of natural causes on November 9, 2003, five days
after his 85th birthday, in his home near Westbrook, Connecticut.[1] He is
interred at Riverside Cemetery in Old Saybrook, Connecticut. Jean Carney died
nine years later on October 31, 2012 at the age of 93.[10]

According to Carney, he was an alcoholic by his late teens. His first stage
partner, comedian Ollie O'Toole, "would order gin and grapefruit juice for us
in the morning and, gee, it was great." Carney would later use barbiturates
and amphetamines as well as alcohol substitutes, and also tried psychotherapy
and joined Alcoholics Anonymous to battle his addiction, which he said ran in
the family. He finally found success with Antabuse and quit drinking during
the filming of _Harry and Tonto._[5]

