**Atmospheric thermodynamics** is the study of heat-to-work transformations
(and their reverse) that take place in the earth's atmosphere and manifest as
weather or climate. Atmospheric thermodynamics use the laws of classical
thermodynamics, to describe and explain such phenomena as the properties of
moist air, the formation of clouds, atmospheric convection, boundary layer
meteorology, and vertical instabilities in the atmosphere. Atmospheric
thermodynamic diagrams are used as tools in the forecasting of storm
development. Atmospheric thermodynamics forms a basis for cloud microphysics
and convection parameterizations used in numerical weather models and is used
in many climate considerations, including convective-equilibrium climate
models.

The atmosphere is an example of a non-equilibrium system.[1] Atmospheric
thermodynamics describes the effect of buoyant forces that cause the rise of
less dense (warmer) air, the descent of more dense air, and the transformation
of water from liquid to vapor (evaporation) and its condensation. Those
dynamics are modified by the force of the pressure gradient and that motion is
modified by the Coriolis force. The tools used include the law of energy
conservation, the ideal gas law, specific heat capacities, the assumption of
isentropic processes (in which entropy is a constant), and moist adiabatic
processes (during which no energy is transferred as heat). Most of
tropospheric gases are treated as ideal gases and water vapor, with its
ability to change phase from vapor, to liquid, to solid, and back is
considered as one of the most important trace components of air.

Advanced topics are phase transitions of water, homogeneous and in-homogeneous
nucleation, effect of dissolved substances on cloud condensation, role of
supersaturation on formation of ice crystals and cloud droplets.
Considerations of moist air and cloud theories typically involve various
temperatures, such as equivalent potential temperature, wet-bulb and virtual
temperatures. Connected areas are energy, momentum, and mass transfer,
turbulence interaction between air particles in clouds, convection, dynamics
of tropical cyclones, and large scale dynamics of the atmosphere.

The major role of atmospheric thermodynamics is expressed in terms of
adiabatic and diabatic forces acting on air parcels included in primitive
equations of air motion either as grid resolved or subgrid parameterizations.
These equations form a basis for the numerical weather and climate
predictions.

In the early 19th century thermodynamicists such as Sadi Carnot, Rudolf
Clausius, and Émile Clapeyron developed mathematical models on the dynamics of
fluid bodies and vapors related to the combustion and pressure cycles of
atmospheric steam engines; one example is the Clausius–Clapeyron equation. In
1873, thermodynamicist Willard Gibbs published "Graphical Methods in the
Thermodynamics of Fluids."

These sorts of foundations naturally began to be applied towards the
development of theoretical models of atmospheric thermodynamics which drew the
attention of the best minds. Papers on atmospheric thermodynamics appeared in
the 1860s that treated such topics as dry and moist adiabatic processes. In
1884 Heinrich Hertz devised first atmospheric thermodynamic diagram
(emagram).[2] Pseudo-adiabatic process was coined by von Bezold describing air
as it is lifted, expands, cools, and eventually precipitates its water vapor;
in 1888 he published voluminous work entitled "On the thermodynamics of the
atmosphere".[3]

In 1911 von Alfred Wegener published a book "Thermodynamik der Atmosphäre",
Leipzig, J. A. Barth. From here the development of atmospheric thermodynamics
as a branch of science began to take root. The term "atmospheric
thermodynamics", itself, can be traced to Frank W. Verys 1919 publication:
"The radiant properties of the earth from the standpoint of atmospheric
thermodynamics" (Occasional scientific papers of the Westwood Astrophysical
Observatory). By the late 1970s various textbooks on the subject began to
appear. Today, atmospheric thermodynamics is an integral part of weather
forecasting.

The Hadley Circulation can be considered as a heat engine.[4] The Hadley
circulation is identified with rising of warm and moist air in the equatorial
region with the descent of colder air in the subtropics corresponding to a
thermally driven direct circulation, with consequent net production of kinetic
energy. The thermodynamic efficiency of the Hadley system, considered as a
heat engine, has been relatively constant over the 1979~2010 period, averaging
2.6%. Over the same interval, the power generated by the Hadley regime has
risen at an average rate of about 0.54 TW per yr; this reflects an increase in
energy input to the system consistent with the observed trend in the tropical
sea surface temperatures.

The thermodynamic behavior of a hurricane can be modelled as a heat engine [5]
that operates between the heat reservoir of the sea at a temperature of about
300K (27 °C) and the heat sink of the tropopause at a temperature of about
200K (−72 °C) and in the process converts heat energy into mechanical energy
of winds. Parcels of air traveling close to the sea surface take up heat and
water vapor, the warmed air rises and expands and cools as it does so causes
condensation and precipitation. The rising air, and condensation, produces
circulatory winds that are propelled by the Coriolis force, which whip up
waves and increase the amount of warm moist air that powers the cyclone. Both
a decreasing temperature in the upper troposphere or an increasing temperature
of the atmosphere close to the surface will increase the maximum winds
observed in hurricanes. When applied to hurricane dynamics it defines a Carnot
heat engine cycle and predicts maximum hurricane intensity.

The Clausius–Clapeyron relation shows how the water-holding capacity of the
atmosphere increases by about 8% per Celsius increase in temperature. (It does
not directly depend on other parameters like the pressure or density.) This
water-holding capacity, or "equilibrium vapor pressure", can be approximated
using the August-Roche-Magnus formula

(where  e s ( T ) {\displaystyle e_{s}(T)}
![e_{s}\(T\)](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/48cf66adc152f0d4d0605e028bc2e0119fcccc8a)
is the equilibrium or saturation vapor pressure in hPa, and  T {\displaystyle
T}
![T](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/ec7200acd984a1d3a3d7dc455e262fbe54f7f6e0)
is temperature in degrees Celsius). This shows that when atmospheric
temperature increases (e.g., due to greenhouse gases) the absolute humidity
should also increase exponentially (assuming a constant relative humidity).
However, this purely thermodynamic argument is subject of considerable debate
because convective processes might cause extensive drying due to increased
areas of subsidence, efficiency of precipitation could be influenced by the
intensity of convection, and because cloud formation is related to relative
humidity.[ _citation needed_ ]

