Coordinates: 35°18′28″S 149°08′08″E﻿ / ﻿35.30790°S 149.13559°E﻿ / -35.30790;
149.13559

The **Australian Strategic Policy Institute** ( **ASPI** ) is an independent
and non-partisan defence and strategic policy think-tank based in Canberra,
the Australian Capital Territory.

ASPI was first established in 2001 by the Australian Government under Prime
Minister John Howard to provide "policy-relevant research and analysis to
better inform Government decisions and public understanding of strategic and
defence issues."[1] ASPI was officially launched at ANZAC Hall at the
Australian War Memorial on March 13, 2002[2] by then Australian Minister for
Defence, Sen the Hon Robert Hill.

ASPI's inaugural director was Hugh White AO, who served as director from 2001
to 2004. White was Deputy Secretary for Strategy and Intelligence at the
Department of Defence between 1995 and 2000, and previously worked for the
Office of National Assessments and as an adviser to Prime Minister Bob Hawke
and Defence Minister Kim Beazley. White is now Professor of Strategic Studies
at the Australian National University.

White was succeeded by Major General Peter Abigail AO (Retd) in April 2005.
Abigail is a former senior Australian Army officer whose positions included
Deputy Chief of Army (1998–2000) and Land Commander Australia (2000–02).
Abigail served as Executive Director of ASPI until 2012.

In February 2012, the Minister for Defence Stephen Smith announced the
appointment of Peter Jennings PSM as ASPI's new Executive Director.[3]
Jennings assumed the role of Executive Director in May 2012.

Jennings "has worked at senior levels in the Australian Public Service on
defence and national security. Career highlights include being Deputy
Secretary for Strategy in the Defence Department (2009-12); Chief of Staff to
the Minister for Defence (1996-98) and Senior Adviser for Strategic Policy to
the Prime Minister (2002-03)."[4]

ASPI was established by the Australian Government in 2001 as a company limited
by guarantee under the 2001 Corporations Act.[5] ASPI receives partial funding
from the Department of Defence "with other sources of revenue including
sponsorship, commissioned tasks, a membership scheme, sale of publications,
advertising and event registration fees."[6]

The think-tank conducts research into a wide range of defence and strategic
policy issues. Current specific research programs at ASPI include:

ASPI regularly publishes a range of different publications. ASPI currently
publishes three different kinds of reports:

ASPI also publishes _The Strategist_ , a daily analysis and commentary site.
_The Strategist_ aims to "provide fresh ideas on Australia's critical defence
and strategic policy choices as well as encourage and facilitate discussion
and debate among the strategy community and Australian public."[7]

ASPI staff often publish opinion articles in other media and research
publications.

