The **Auxilia** (Latin, lit. "auxiliaries") were introduced as non-citizen
troops attached to the citizen legions by Augustus after his reorganisation of
the Imperial Roman army from 30 BC.[1] By the 2nd century, the Auxilia
contained the same number of infantry as the legions and, in addition,
provided almost all of the Roman army's cavalry (especially light cavalry and
archers) and more specialised troops. The _auxilia_ thus represented three-
fifths of Rome's regular land forces at that time. Like their legionary
counterparts, auxiliary recruits were mostly volunteers, not conscripts.

The Auxilia were mainly recruited from the _peregrini_ , free provincial
subjects who did not hold Roman citizenship and constituted the vast majority
of the population in the 1st and 2nd centuries (c. 90% in the early 1st
century). In contrast to the legions, which only admitted Roman citizens,
members of the Auxilia could be recruited from territories outside of Roman
control.

Reliance on the various contingents of non-Italic troops, especially cavalry,
increased when the Roman Republic employed them in increasing numbers to
support its legions after 200 BC. The Julio-Claudian period (30 BC–68 AD) saw
the transformation of the Auxilia from motley levies to a standing corps with
standardised structure, equipment and conditions of service. By the end of the
period, there were no significant differences between legionaries and
auxiliaries in terms of training, and thus, combat capability.

Auxiliary regiments were often stationed in provinces other than that in which
they were originally raised, for reasons of security and to foster the process
of Romanisation in the provinces. The regimental names of many auxiliary units
persisted into the 4th century, but by then the units in question were
different in size, structure, and quality from their predecessors.

The mainstay of the Roman republic's war machine was the manipular legion, a
heavy infantry unit suitable for close-quarter engagements on more or less any
terrain, which was probably adopted sometime during the Samnite Wars (343–290
BC).[2] Despite its formidable strength, the legion had a number of
deficiencies, especially a lack of cavalry. Around 200 BC, a legion of 4,200
infantry had a cavalry arm of only 300 horse (just 7% of the total force).[3]
This was because the class of citizens who could afford to pay for their own
horse and equipment – the equestrian order, the second rank in Roman society,
after the senatorial order – was relatively small. In addition, the legion
lacked missile forces such as slingers and archers.[4] Until 200 BC, the bulk
of a Roman army's cavalry was provided by Rome's regular Italian allies (
_socii_ ), commonly known as the "Latin" allies, which made up the Roman
military confederation. This was Rome's defence system until the Social War of
91–88 BC. The Italian forces were organised into _alae_ (literally: "wings",
because they were generally posted on the flanks of the Roman line of battle).
An allied _ala_ , commanded by 3 Roman _praefecti sociorum_ , was similar or
slightly larger in infantry size (4–5,000 men) to a legion, but contained a
more substantial cavalry contingent: 900 horse, three times the legionary
contingent. Since a pre-Social War consular army always contained an equal
number of legions and _alae_ , 75% of its cavalry was provided by the Latin
allies. The overall cavalry element, c. 12% of the total force (2,400 out of a
normal consular army of approximately 20,000 total effectives), was greater
than in most peninsular Italian forces, but well below the overall 21% cavalry
component that was typical of the Principate army (80,000 cavalry out of
380,000 total effectives in the early 2nd century).[5][6]

The Roman/Latin cavalry was sufficient while Rome was in conflict with other
states in the mountainous Italian peninsula, which also disposed of limited
cavalry resources. But, as Rome was confronted by external enemies that
deployed far more powerful cavalry elements, such as the Gauls and the
Carthaginians, the Roman deficiency in cavalry numbers could be a serious
liability, which in the Second Punic War (218–202 BC) resulted in crushing
defeats. Hannibal's major victories at the Trebia and at Cannae, were owed to
his Spanish and Gallic heavy cavalry, which far outnumbered the Roman and
Latin levies, and to his Numidians, light, fast cavalry which the Romans
wholly lacked.[7] The decisive Roman victory at Zama in 202 BC, which ended
the war, owed much to the Numidian cavalry provided by king Massinissa, which
outnumbered the Roman/Latin cavalry fielded by 2 to 1.[8] From then, Roman
armies were always accompanied by large numbers of non-Italian cavalry:
Numidian light cavalry and, later, Gallic heavy cavalry. For example, Caesar
relied heavily on Gallic and German cavalry for his Conquest of Gaul (58–51
BC).[9]

As the role of native cavalry grew, that of Roman/Latin cavalry diminished. In
the early 1st century BC, Roman cavalry was phased out altogether. After the
Social War, the _socii_ were all granted Roman citizenship, the Latin _alae_
abolished, and the _socii_ recruited into the legions.[10] Furthermore, Roman
equestrians were no longer required to perform cavalry service after this
time.[11] The late Republican legion was thus probably bereft of cavalry (a
tiny cavalry force of 120 men was probably added back to the legion under
Augustus).[12]

By the outbreak of the Second Punic War, the Romans were remedying the
legions' other deficiencies by using non-Italian specialised troops. Livy
reports Hiero of Syracuse offering to supply Rome with archers and slingers in
217 BC.[13] From 200 BC onwards, specialist troops were hired as mercenaries
on a regular basis: _sagittarii_ (archers) from Crete, and _funditores_
(slingers) from the Balearic Isles almost always accompanied Roman legions in
campaigns all over the Mediterranean.[14]

The other main sources of non-Italian troops in the late Republic were subject
provincials, allied cities and Rome's _amici_ (satellite kings). During the
late Republic, non-Italian units were led by their own native chiefs, and
their internal organisation was left to their own commanders. The units varied
widely in dress, equipment, and weapons. They were normally raised for
specific campaigns and often disbanded soon afterwards, in a similar manner to
the earlier _socii_ militia legions.[15]

It appears that not all indigenous units were disbanded at the end of the
civil war period (31 BC). Some of the more experienced units were kept in
existence to complement the legions, and became the core of the standing
auxiliary forces that developed in the Julio-Claudian period.[16] During the
early part of Augustus' rule (27 BC onwards), the corps of regular Auxilia was
created. It was clearly inspired by the Latin forces of the pre-Social War
Republic, as a corps of non-citizen troops parallel to the legions. But there
were fundamental differences, the same as between Republican and Augustan
legions. The Latin forces of the Republic were made up of part-time conscripts
in units that would be raised and disbanded for and after particular
campaigns. The Augustan Auxilia were mainly volunteer professionals serving in
permanent units.[9]

The unit structure of the Auxilia also differed from the Latin _alae_ , which
were like legions with a larger cavalry arm. However, Augustus organised the
Auxilia into regiments the size of cohorts (a tenth the size of legions), due
to the much greater flexibility of the smaller unit size. Further, the
regiments were of three types: _ala_ (cavalry), _cohors (peditata)_ (infantry)
and _cohors equitata_ (mixed cavalry/infantry).[17]

The evidence for the size of the Augustus' new units is not clearcut, with our
most precise evidence dating to the 2nd century, by which time the unit
strengths may have changed. _Cohortes_ were likely modelled on legionary
cohorts i.e. six _centuriae_ of about 80 men each (total about 480 men).[18]
_Alae_ were divided into _turmae_ (squadrons) of 30 (or 32) men, each under a
_decurio_ (literally: "leader of ten").[19] This title derives from the old
Roman cavalry of the pre-Social War republic, in which each _turma_ was under
the command of three _decuriones_.[20] _Cohortes equitatae_ were infantry
_cohortes_ with a cavalry contingent of four _turmae_ attached.[21]

Auxiliary regiments were now led by a _praefectus_ (prefect), who could be
either a native nobleman, who would probably be granted Roman citizenship for
the purpose (e.g. the famous German war leader Arminius gained Roman
citizenship probably by serving as an auxiliary prefect before turning against
Rome); or a Roman, either of knightly rank, or a senior centurion.[22]

At the start of Augustus' sole rule (30 BC), the original core auxiliary units
in the West were composed of warlike tribesmen from the Gallic provinces
(especially Gallia Belgica, which then included the regions later separated to
form the provinces Germania Inferior and Germania Superior), and from the
Balkan provinces (Dalmatia and Illyricum). By 19 BC, the Cantabrian and
Asturian Wars were concluded, leading to the annexation of northern Hispania
and Lusitania. Judging by the names of attested auxiliary regiments, these
parts of the Iberian peninsula soon became a major source of recruits. Then
the Danubian regions were annexed: Raetia (annexed 15 BC), Noricum (16 BC),
Pannonia (9 BC) and Moesia (6 AD), becoming, with Illyricum, the Principate's
most important source of auxiliary recruits for its entire duration. In the
East, where the Syrians already provided the bulk of the Roman army's archers,
Augustus annexed Galatia (25 BC) and Judaea: the former, a region in central
Anatolia with a Celtic-speaking people, became an important source of
recruits. In N. Africa, Egypt, Cyrene, and Numidia (25 BC) were added to the
empire. Numidia (modern day Eastern Algeria) was home to the Numidians/Moors,
the ancestors of today's Berber people. Their light cavalry ( _equites
Maurorum_ ) was highly prized and had alternately fought and assisted the
Romans for well over two centuries: they now started to be recruited into the
regular Auxilia. Even more Mauri units were formed after the annexation of
Mauretania (NW Algeria, Morocco), the rest of the Berber homeland, in 44 AD by
emperor Claudius (ruled 41–54).[23]

Recruitment was thus heavy throughout the Augustan period, with a steady
increase in the number of units formed. By AD 23, the Roman historian Tacitus
records that there were roughly the same numbers of auxiliaries in service as
there were legionaries.[24] Since at this time there were 25 legions of c.
5,000 men each, the Auxilia thus amounted to c. 125,000 men, implying c. 250
auxiliary regiments.[25]

During the early Julio-Claudian period, many auxiliary regiments raised in
frontier provinces were stationed in or near their home provinces, except
during periods of major crises such as the Cantabrian Wars, when they were
deployed temporarily in theatre. This carried the obvious risk if their own
tribe or ethnic group rebelled against Rome (or attacked the Roman frontier
from outside the Empire), auxiliary troops could be tempted to make common
cause with them. The Romans would then be faced by an enemy that included
units fully equipped and trained by themselves, thus losing their usual
tactical advantages over tribal foes.[26]

The German leader Arminius is the classic example at an individual level:
after several years of serving in Rome's forces as prefect of an auxiliary
unit, he used the military training and experience he had gained to lead a
confederacy of German tribes against Rome, culminating in the destruction of
three Roman legions in the Teutoberg Forest in 9 AD, and the abandonment of
Augustus' strategy of annexing Germany as far as the Elbe river. (This
strategy was never revived by later emperors).[27]

At a collective level, the risk was even greater, as the hugely dangerous
Illyrian revolt proved. The central Illyrian tribes were tough and spartan
shepherds of the Bosnian mountains and excellent soldier-material. Their
territory formed part of the strategic province of Illyricum, recently
expanded to include the territory of the Pannonii, Celticised Illyrian tribes
based on the west bank of the Danube who were subjugated by Rome in 12–9 BC
(the _Bellum Pannonicum_ ). By the start of the Common Era, they were an
important recruitment base for the auxilia.[28] But discontent was festering
among the Illyrian tribes, largely due to what they saw as the rapacity of
Roman tax officials.[29] In AD 6, several regiments of Dalmatae, a warlike
Illyrian tribe, were ordered to report to a designated location to prepare to
join Augustus' stepson and senior military commander Tiberius in a war against
the Germans. Instead, they mutinied at the assembly point, and defeated a
Roman force sent against them.[30] The Dalmatae were soon joined by the
Breuci, another Illyrian tribe that supplied several auxiliary regiments. They
gave battle to a second Roman force from Moesia. They lost, but inflicted
heavy casualties.[31] The rebels were now joined by a large number of other
Illyrian tribes. The Dalmatae attacked the port of Salona and overran the
Adriatic coast, defeating a Roman force and exposing the Roman heartland of
Italy to the fear of a rebel invasion.[32]

Augustus ordered Tiberius to break off operations in Germany and move his main
army to Illyricum.[33] When it became clear that even Tiberius' forces were
insufficient, Augustus was obliged to raise a second task force under
Tiberius' nephew Germanicus, resorting to the compulsory purchase and
emancipation of thousands of slaves to find enough troops, for the first time
since the aftermath of the Battle of Cannae over two centuries earlier.[34]
The Romans had now deployed no less than 15 legions and an equivalent number
of auxilia.[35] This amounts to a total of c. 150,000 men, including at least
50 auxiliary cohorts composed, exceptionally, of Roman citizens. These were
men whose status or background was regarded by Augustus as unsuitable for
recruitment into the legions: either natural-born citizens of the lowest
category, including vagrants and convicted criminals, or the freed slaves
(Roman law accorded citizenship to the freed slaves of Roman citizens). These
special units were accorded the title _civium Romanorum_ ("of Roman
citizens"), or _c.R._ for short. After the Illyrian revolt, these cohorts
remained in being and recruited non-citizens like other auxiliary units, but
retained their prestigious _c.R._ title.[17][36] In addition, the regular
forces were assisted by a large number of allied troops from neighbouring
Thrace deployed by their king Rhoemetalces I, a Roman _amicus_ (puppet
king).[37]

The Romans faced further reverses on the battlefield and a savage guerrilla
war in the Bosnian mountains.[38] It took them three years of hard fighting to
quell the revolt, which was described by the Roman historian Suetonius,
writing in c. AD 100, as the most difficult conflict faced by Rome since the
Punic Wars over two centuries earlier.[35] Tiberius finally succeeded in
quelling the revolt in 9 AD. This was apparently lucky timing for the Romans:
that same year Arminius destroyed Varus' three legions in Germany. The Roman
high command had no doubt that Arminius would have formed a grand alliance
with the Illyrians.[39]

Despite the gravity of this rebellion, the Illyrians went on, alongside their
neighbours the Thracians, to become the backbone of the Roman army. By the 2nd
century, with roughly half the Roman army deployed on the Danube frontier, the
auxilia and legions alike were dominated by Illyrian recruits. In the 3rd
century, Illyrians largely replaced Italians in the senior officer echelons of
_praefecti_ of auxiliary regiments and _tribuni militum_ of legions. Finally,
from AD 268 to 379, virtually all emperors, including Diocletian and
Constantine the Great were Romanised Illyrians from the provinces of Dalmatia,
Moesia Superior and Pannonia. These were members of a military aristocracy,
outstanding soldiers who saved the empire from collapse in the turbulent late
3rd century.[40]

Significant development of the Auxilia appears to have taken place during the
rule of the emperor Claudius (41–54 AD).

A minimum term of service of 25 years was established, at the end of which the
retiring auxiliary soldier, and all his children, were awarded Roman
citizenship.[41] This is deduced from the fact that the first known Roman
military diplomas date from the time of Claudius. This was a folding bronze
tablet engraved with the details of the soldier's service record, which he
could use to prove his citizenship.[42] Claudius also decreed that prefects of
auxiliary regiments must all be of equestrian rank, thus excluding centurions
from such commands.[41] The fact that auxiliary commanders were now all of the
same social rank as most _tribuni militum_ , (military tribunes, a legion's
senior staff officers, all of whom only one, the _tribunus laticlavius_ , was
of the higher senatorial rank), probably indicates that auxilia now enjoyed
greater prestige. Indigenous chiefs continued to command some auxiliary
regiments, and were probably granted equestrian rank for the purpose. It is
also likely that auxiliary pay was standardised at this time, but we only have
estimates for the Julio-Claudian period.[41]

Auxiliary uniform, armour, weapons and equipment were probably standardised by
the end of the Julio-Claudian period. Auxiliary equipment was broadly similar
to that of the legions (see Section 2.1 below for possible differences in
armour). By 68 AD, there was little difference between most auxiliary infantry
and their legionary counterparts in equipment, training and fighting
capability. The main difference was that auxilia contained combat cavalry,
both heavy and light, and other specialized units that legions lacked.[43]

Claudius annexed to the empire three regions that became important sources of
auxiliary recruits: Britannia (43 AD), and the former client kingdoms of
Mauretania (44) and Thracia (46). The latter became as important as Illyria as
a source of auxiliary recruits, especially cavalry and archers. Britain in
mid-2nd century contained the largest number of auxiliary regiments in any
single province: about 60 out of about 400 (15%).[5] By the rule of Nero
(54–68), auxiliary numbers may have reached, by one estimate, about 200,000
men, implying about 400 regiments.[41]

The Batavi, a Germanic tribe, inhabited the region today known as Gelderland
(Netherlands), in the Rhine river delta, then known as the _Insula Batavorum_
("Island of the Batavi", because surrounded by branches of the Rhine), part of
the Roman province of Germania Inferior.[44] They were a warlike people,
skilled horsemen, boatmen and swimmers. In return for the unusual privilege of
exemption from _tributum_ (direct taxes on land and heads normally exacted
from _peregrini_ ), they supplied a disproportionate number of recruits to the
Julio-Claudian auxilia: one _ala_ and eight _cohortes_.[45] They also provided
most of Augustus' elite personal bodyguard unit (the _Germani corpore
custodes_ ), which continued in service until 68 AD. The Batavi auxilia
amounted to about 5,000 men, implying that during the entire Julio-Claudian
period, over 50% of all Batavi males reaching military age (16 years) may have
enlisted in the auxilia.[46] Thus the Batavi, although just 0.05% of the total
population of the empire of c. 70 million in 23 AD,[47] supplied about 4% of
the total auxilia i.e. 80 times their proportionate share. They were regarded
by the Romans as the very best ( _fortissimi_ , _validissimi_ ) of their
auxiliary, and indeed all, their forces.[48] In Roman service, both their
cavalry and infantry had perfected a technique for swimming across rivers
wearing full armour and weapons.[49][50]

Julius Civilis (literally: "Julius the Citizen", clearly a Latin name adopted
on gaining Roman citizenship, not his native one) was a hereditary prince of
the Batavi and the prefect of a Batavi cohort. A veteran of 25 years' service,
he had distinguished himself by service in Britain, where he and the eight
Batavi cohorts had played a crucial role in both the Roman invasion in 43 AD
and the subsequent subjugation of southern Britain.[51]

By 69, however, Civilis, the Batavi regiments and the Batavi people had become
utterly disaffected with Rome. After the Batavi regiments were withdrawn from
Britain to Italy in 66, Civilis and his brother (also a prefect) were arrested
by the governor of Germania Inferior on a fabricated accusation of sedition.
The governor ordered his brother's execution, while Civilis, who as a Roman
citizen had the right to appeal to the emperor, was sent to Rome in chains for
judgement by Nero.[52] He was released by Nero's overthrower and successor,
Galba, but the latter also disbanded the imperial bodyguard unit for their
loyalty to Nero. This alienated several hundred crack Batavi troops, and
indeed the whole Batavi nation who regarded it as a grave insult.[53] At the
same time, relations collapsed between the Batavi cohorts and the legion to
which they had been attached since the invasion of Britain 25 years earlier (
_XIV Gemina_ ). Their mutual hatred erupted in open fighting on at least two
occasions.[54]

At this juncture, the Roman empire was convulsed by its first major civil war
since the Battle of Actium exactly a century earlier: the Year of the Four
Emperors (69–70 AD). The governor of Germania Inferior, ordered to raise more
troops, outraged the Batavi by attempting to conscript more Batavi than the
maximum stipulated in their treaty. The brutality and corruption of the Roman
recruiting-centurions (including incidents of sexual assault on Batavi young
men) brought already deep discontent in the Batavi homeland to the boil.[55]

Civilis now led his people in open revolt. Initially, he claimed he was
supporting the bid for power of Vespasian, the general in command of the
legions in Syria, whom Civilis had probably befriended when both were involved
in the Roman invasion of Britain 25 years earlier (Vespasian was then
commander of the legion _II Augusta_ ).[56] But the uprising soon became a bid
for independence.[57] Civilis exploited the fact that some legions were absent
from the Rhine area due to the civil war, and the rest under-strength. In
addition, the Roman commanders and their rank-and-file soldiers were divided
by loyalty to rival emperors.[58] Civilis quickly won the support of the
Batavi's neighbours and kinsmen, the Cananefates, who in turn won over the
Frisii. First the rebel allies captured two Roman forts in their territory,
and a cohort of Tungri defected to Civilis.[59] Then two legions sent against
Civilis were defeated when their companion Batavi _ala_ defected to his
side.[44] The _Classis Germanica_ (Rhine flotilla), largely manned by Batavi,
was seized by Civilis.[60] Most importantly, the 8 Batavi cohorts stationed at
Mainz with _XIV Gemina_ mutinied and joined him, defeating at Bonn a Roman
force that attempted to block their return to their homeland.[61] By now,
Civilis commanded at least 12 regiments (6,000 men) of Roman-trained and
equipped auxiliary troops, as well as a much larger number of tribal levies. A
number of German tribes from beyond the Rhine joined his cause.[62] Several
other German and Gallic units sent against him deserted, as the revolt spread
to the rest of Gallia Belgica, including the Tungri, Lingones and Treviri
tribes.[63] He was able to destroy the two remaining legions in Germania
Inferior, ( _V Alaudae_ and _XV Primigenia_ ).[64]

By this stage, Rome's entire position on the Rhine and even in Gaul was
imperiled. Their civil war over, the Romans mustered a huge task force of
eight legions (five dispatched from Italy, two from Spain and one from
Britain) to deal with Civilis.[65] Its commander Petillius Cerialis had to
fight two difficult battles, at Trier and Xanten, before he could overrun the
Batavi's homeland.[66] Tacitus' surviving narrative breaks off as he describes
a meeting on an island in the Rhine delta between Civilis and Cerialis to
discuss peace terms.[67] We do not know the outcome of this meeting or
Civilis' ultimate fate. But, in view of his former friendship with Vespasian,
who had already offered him a pardon, and the fact that the Romans still
needed the Batavi levies, it is likely that the terms were lenient by Roman
standards.[68]

Petilius Cerialis took a number of reconstituted Batavi units with him to
Britain, and the Batavi regiments continued to serve with special distinction
in Britain and elsewhere for the rest of the 1st century and beyond.[69] Even
as late as 395, units with the Batavi name, although long since composed of
recruits from all over the empire, were still classified as elite _palatini_ ,
e.g. the _equites Batavi seniores_ (cavalry) and _auxilium Batavi seniores_
(infantry).[70]

The revolt of the Batavi appears to have led to a significant change in the
Roman government's policy on deployment of Auxilia. The revolt proved that in
times of civil strife, when legions were far from their bases campaigning for
rival claimants to the imperial throne, it was dangerous to leave provinces
exclusively in the hands of auxiliary regiments recruited from the indigenous
nation. During the Julio-Claudian period, auxiliary regiments had often been
deployed away from their original home province.[9] But in the Flavian period
(69–96), this appears to have become standard policy.[26] Thus in AD 70, five
reconstituted Batavi regiments (one _ala_ and four _cohortes_ ) were
transferred to Britain under Petillius Cerialis, who had suppressed the
Civilis revolt and then embarked on the governorship of the island.[71] The
great majority of regiments probably founded in the 1st century were stationed
away from their province of origin in the second e.g. of 13 British regiments
recorded in the mid-2nd century, none were stationed in Britain.[72]
Furthermore, it appears that in the Flavian era native noblemen were no longer
permitted to command auxiliary units from their own tribe.[73]

After a prolonged period in a foreign province a regiment would become
assimilated, since the majority of its new recruits would be drawn from the
province in which it was stationed, or neighbouring provinces.[26] Those same
"British" units, mostly based on the Danube frontier, would by c. 150, after
almost a century away from their home island, be largely composed of Illyrian,
Thracian and Dacian recruits. However, there is evidence that a few regiments
at least continued to draw some recruits from their original home provinces in
the 2nd century e.g. Batavi units stationed in Britain.[74]

The Flavian period also saw the first formation of large, double-size units,
both infantry and cavalry, of a nominal strength of 1,000 men ( _cohors/ala
milliaria_ ), though they were actually mostly smaller (720 for an _ala
milliaria_ and 800 for a _cohors milliaria_ ).[41] These were the mirror image
of the double-strength first cohorts of legions also introduced at this time.
Such units remained a minority of the Auxilia: in the mid-2nd century, they
constituted 13% of units, containing 20% of total manpower.[75]

In 106 AD, emperor Trajan finally defeated the Dacian kingdom of Decebalus and
annexed it as the Roman province of Dacia Traiana. By the mid-2nd century,
there were 44 auxiliary regiments stationed there, about 10% of the total
auxilia. In Britain, there were 60. Together, these two provinces contained
about a quarter of the total auxiliary regiments.[5]

There is considerable scholarly dispute about the precise size of the auxilia
during the imperial era, even during the corp's best-documented period, the
rule of Trajan's successor, Hadrian (117–138). This is evident if one compares
calculations by Spaul (2000) and Holder (2003):

NOTE: Manpower figures exclude officers (centurions and decurions), which
would have numbered about 3,500 men overall.

In addition, Holder believes that a further 14 _cohortes_ , which are attested
under Trajan, immediately before Hadrian's rule, but not during or after it,
probably continued in existence, giving a total of 381 units and 225,000
effectives. The discrepancy between the two scholars is due to: (i)
Interpretation of units with the same name and number, but attested in
different provinces in the same period. Spaul tends to take a more cautious
approach and to assume such are the same unit moving base frequently, while
Holder tends to regard them as separate units which acquired the same number
due to duplicated (or even triplicated) seriation. (ii) Assumptions about how
many _cohortes_ were _equitatae_. Spaul accepts only those _cohortes_
specifically attested as _equitatae_ i.e., about 40% of recorded units. Holder
estimates that at least 70% of _cohortes_ contained cavalry contingents by the
early 2nd century[78]

Even according to the more conservative estimate, the auxilia were by this
time significantly larger than the legions, which contained c. 155,000
effectives (28 legions of 5,500 men each) at this time, of which just 3,360
were cavalry. (For a detailed breakdown, see section 4: Auxilia deployment in
the 2nd century, below).

During the second half of the 2nd century, the Roman army underwent
considerable further expansion, with the addition of five new legions (27,500
men) to a Principate peak of 33.[79] A matching number of auxilia (i.e. c. 50
regiments, although only the names of around 25–30 have survived in the
epigraphic record) were probably added, possibly reaching a peak of c. 440
regiments and around 250,000 effectives by the end of Septimius Severus's rule
(211 AD).[6]

The likely growth of the Roman auxilia may be summarised as follows:

NOTE: Regular land forces only. Excludes citizen-militias, barbarian
_foederati_ , and Roman navy effectives

During the 2nd century, some units with the new names _numerus_ ("group") and
_vexillatio_ ("detachment") appear in the diploma record.[93] Their size is
uncertain, but was likely smaller than the regular _alae_ and _cohortes_ , as
originally they were probably detachments from the latter, acquiring
independent status after long-term separation. As these units are mentioned in
diplomas, they were presumably part of the regular auxiliary organisation.[94]
But _numeri_ was also a generic term used for barbarian units outside the
regular auxilia. (see section 2.4 Irregular units, below).

In 212, the _constitutio Antoniniana_ (Antonine decree) of emperor Caracalla
granted Roman citizenship to all the free inhabitants of the Empire – the
_peregrini_ – thus abolishing their second-class status.[95] But there is no
evidence that the citizens-only rule for legions was also abolished at this
time. The legions simply gained a much wider recruitment base, as they were
now able to recruit any male free resident of the empire. Auxiliary units were
now recruited mainly from Roman citizens, but probably continued to recruit
non-citizen _barbari_ from outside the Empire's borders.[96] However, the
citizens-only rule for legions appears to have been dropped some time during
the 3rd century, as by the 4th-century Romans and barbarians are found serving
together in all units.[97]

In the mid to late 3rd century, the army was afflicted by a combination of
military disasters and of pestilence, the so-called Crisis of the Third
Century. In 251–271, Gaul, the Alpine regions and Italy, the Balkans and the
East were simultaneously overrun by Alamanni, Sarmatians, Goths and Persians
respectively.[98] At the same time, the Roman army was struggling with the
effects of a devastating pandemic, probably of smallpox: the Plague of
Cyprian, which began in 251 and was still raging in 270, when it claimed the
life of emperor Claudius II Gothicus. The evidence for an earlier pandemic,
the Antonine Plague (also smallpox) indicates a mortality of 15–30% in the
empire as a whole.[99] The armies would likely have suffered deaths at the top
end of the range, due to their close concentration of individuals and frequent
movements across the empire.[100] This probably led to a steep decline in
military numbers, which only recovered at the end of the century under
Diocletian (r. 284–305).[101]

The recruitment shortfall caused by the crisis seems to have led to
recruitment of barbarians to the auxilia on a much greater scale than
previously. By the 4th century, it has been estimated that some 25% of regular
army recruits were barbarian-born. In the elite _palatini_ regiments, anywhere
between a third and a half of recruits may have been barbarian.[97] This is
likely a much greater proportion of foreigners than joined the auxilia in the
1st and 2nd centuries.[102] In the 3rd century, a small number of regular
auxiliary units appear in the record that, for the first time, bear the names
of barbarian tribes from outside the empire e.g. the _ala I Sarmatarum_
attested in 3rd-century Britain.[103] This was probably an offshoot of the
5,500 surrendered Sarmatian horsemen posted on Hadrian's Wall by emperor
Marcus Aurelius in c. 175.[104] This unit may be an early example of a novel
process whereby irregular units of _barbari_ ( _foederati_ ) were transformed
into regular auxilia. This process intensified in the 4th century: the
_Notitia Dignitatum_ , a key document on the late Roman army, lists a large
number of regular units with barbarian names.[105]

In the 4th century, the Roman army underwent a radical restructuring. In the
rule of Diocletian (284–305), the traditional Principate formations of
_legiones_ , _alae_ and _cohortes_ appear to have been broken up into smaller
units, many of which bore a variety of new names.[106] Under Constantine I (r.
312–337) it appears that military units were classified into three grades
based on strategic role and to some extent quality: _palatini_ , elite units
normally part of the _exercitus praesentales_ (imperial escort armies);
_comitatenses_ , higher-grade interception forces based in frontier provinces;
and _limitanei_ , lower-grade border troops.[107] (See Late Roman army).

The old Principate auxilia regiments provided the basis for units at all three
grades. The _Notitia Dignitatum_ lists about 70 _alae_ and _cohortes_ that
retained their 2nd-century names, mostly _limitanei_.[108] But traces of other
auxilia regiments can be found in the _praesentales_ and _comitatenses_
armies. For example, many of the new-style _auxilia palatina_ infantry
regiments, considered among the best units in the army, were probably formed
from old-style auxiliary _cohortes_ , which they appear to closely
resemble.[109]

The late 4th-century writer on military affairs Vegetius complains of
contemporary young men joining the "auxilia" in preference to the "legions" to
avoid the latter's tougher training and duties.[110] But it is unclear what
types of units he was referring to. It is possible that those older terms were
still popularly used (misleadingly) to mean _limitanei_ and _comitatenses_
respectively. In any event, his quote in no way describes accurately the
Principate auxilia, many of which were of very high quality.[17]

The following table sets out the official, or establishment, strength of
auxiliary units in the 2nd century. The real strength of a unit would
fluctuate continually, but would likely have been somewhat less than the
establishment most of the time.

***** _tribunus militum_ in original c.R. _cohortes_[111]  
****** _praefectus_ in Batavi and Tungri _cohortes milliariae_[111]

NOTE: Opinion is divided about the size of an _ala_ _turma_ , between 30 and
32 men. 30 was the size of a _turma_ in the Republican cavalry and in the
_cohors equitata_ of the Principate auxilia. Against this is a statement by
Arrian that an _ala_ was 512 strong.[112] This would make an ala _turma_ 32
men strong.

These all-infantry units were modelled on the cohorts of the legions, with the
same officers and sub-units. They were typically considered to be more of a
light infantry than proper legionaries. Some auxiliaries may however have been
equipped with the _lorica segmentata_ , the most sophisticated legionary body-
armour, although scholars dispute this.[113][114]

There is no evidence that auxiliary infantry fought in a looser order than
legionaries.[17] It appears that in a set-piece battle-line, auxiliary
infantry would normally be stationed on the flanks, with legionary infantry
holding the centre e.g. as in the Battle of Watling Street (AD 60), the final
defeat of the rebel Britons under queen Boudicca.[115] This was a tradition
inherited from the Republic, when the precursors of auxiliary _cohortes_ , the
Latin _alae_ , occupied the same position in the line.[116] The flanks of the
line required equal, if not greater, skill to hold as the centre.

During the Principate period of the Roman Empire (30 BC – AD 284), the all-
mounted _alae_ ("wings") contained the elite cavalry of the army.[17] They
were specially trained in elaborate manoeuvres, such as those displayed to the
emperor Hadrian during a documented inspection in Numidia. They were best-
suited for large-scale operations and battle, during which they acted as the
primary cavalry escort for the legions, which had almost no cavalry of their
own. Roman alares were normally armoured, with mail or scale body armour, a
cavalry version of the infantry helmet (with more protective features, such as
completely covered ears) and oval shield or hexagonal. Their weapons could be
a lance, javelins, or bow and arrow but all Roman horseman had a sword called
a ( _spatha_ ) and the ubiquitous pugio. The elite status of an _alaris_ is
shown by the fact that he received 20% more pay than his counterpart in an
auxiliary cohort or a legionary infantryman.

The favored sources of recruitment for the cavalry of the _auxilia_ were
Gauls, Germans, Iberians and Thracians. All of these peoples had long-
established skills and experience of fighting from horseback – in contrast to
the Romans themselves. The _alae_ were better paid and mounted than the more
numerous horsemen of the _cohortes equitatae_[117] (see below).

These were _cohortes_ with a cavalry contingent attached. There is evidence
that their numbers expanded with the passage of time. Only about 40% of
attested _cohortes_ are specifically attested as _equitatae_ in inscriptions,
which is probably the original Augustan proportion. A study of units stationed
in Syria in the mid-2nd century found that many units that did not carry the
_equitata_ title did in fact contain cavalrymen e.g. by discovery of a
tombstone of a cavalryman attached to the cohort. This implies that by that
time, at least 70% of _cohortes_ were probably _equitatae_.[78] The addition
of cavalry to a cohort obviously enabled it to carry out a wider range of
independent operations. A _cohors equitata_ was in effect a self-contained
mini-army.[118]

The traditional view of _equites cohortales_ (the cavalry arm of _cohortes
equitatae_ ), as expounded by G.L. Cheesman, was that they were just a mounted
infantry with poor-quality horses. They would use their mounts simply to reach
the battlefield and then would dismount to fight.[119] This view is today
discredited. Although it is clear that _equites cohortales_ did not match
_equites alares_ ( _ala_ cavalrymen) in quality (hence their lower pay), the
evidence is that they fought as cavalry in the same way as the _alares_ and
often alongside them. Their armour and weapons were the same as for the
_alares_.[120]

Nevertheless, non-combat roles of the _equites cohortales_ differed
significantly from the _alares_. Non-combat roles such as despatch-riders (
_dispositi_ ) were generally filled by cohort cavalry.

In the Republican period, the standard trio of specialised auxilia were
Balearic slingers, Cretan archers and Numidian light cavalry. These functions,
plus some new ones, continued in the 2nd-century auxilia.

_Equites cataphractarii_ , or simply _cataphractarii_ for short, were the
heavily armoured cavalry of the Roman army. Based on Sarmatian and Parthian
models, they were also known as _contarii_ and _clibanarii_ , although it is
unclear whether these terms were interchangeable or whether they denoted
variations in equipment or role. Together with new units of light mounted
archers, the _cataphractarii_ were designed to counter Parthian (and, in
Pannonia, Sarmatian) battle tactics. Parthian armies consisted largely of
cavalry. Their standard tactic was to use light mounted archers to weaken and
break up the Roman infantry line, and then to rout it with a charge by the
_cataphractarii_ concentrated on the weakest point.[121] The only special
heavy cavalry units to appear in the 2nd-century record are: _ala I Ulpia
contariorum_ and _ala I Gallorum et Pannoniorum cataphractaria_ stationed in
Pannonia and Moesia Inferior respectively in the 2nd century.[122]

From the Second Punic War until the 3rd century AD, the bulk of Rome's light
cavalry (apart from mounted archers from Syria) was provided by the
inhabitants of the Maghrebi provinces of Africa and Mauretania Caesariensis,
the Numidae or Mauri (from whom derives the English term "Moors"), who were
the ancestors of the Berber people of modern Algeria and Morocco. They were
known as the _equites Maurorum_ or _Numidarum_ ("Moorish or Numidian
cavalry"). On Trajan's Column, Mauri horsemen, depicted with long hair in
dreadlocks, are shown riding their small but resilient horses bare-back and
unbridled, with a simple braided rope round their mount's neck for control.
They wear no body or head armour, carrying only a small, round leather shield.
Their weaponry cannot be discerned due to stone erosion, but is known from
Livy to have consisted of several short javelins.[123][124] Exceptionally fast
and maneuverable, Numidian cavalry would harass the enemy by hit-and-run
attacks, riding up and loosing volleys of javelins, then scattering faster
than any opposing cavalry could pursue. They were superbly suited to scouting,
harassment, ambush and pursuit.[125] It is unclear what proportion of the
Numidian cavalry were regular auxilia units as opposed to irregular
_foederati_ units.[126]

In the 3rd century, new formations of light cavalry appear, apparently
recruited from the Danubian provinces: the _equites Dalmatae_ ("Dalmatian
cavalry"). Little is known about these, but they were prominent in the 4th
century, with several units listed in the _Notitia Dignitatum_.

A unit of _dromedarii_ ("camel-mounted troops") is attested from the 2nd
century, the _ala I Ulpia dromedariorum milliaria_ in Syria.[127]

A substantial number of auxiliary regiments (32, or about 1 in 12 in the 2nd
century) were denoted _sagittariorum_ , or archer-units (from _sagittarii_
lit. "arrow-men", from _sagitta_ = "arrow"). These 32 units (of which 4 were
double-strength) had a total official strength of 17,600 men. All three types
of auxiliary regiment ( _ala_ , _cohors_ and _cohors equitata_ ) could be
denoted _sagittariorum_. Although these units evidently specialised in
archery, it is uncertain from the available evidence whether all
_sagittariorum_ personnel were archers, or simply a higher proportion than in
ordinary units. At the same time, ordinary regiments probably also possessed
some archers, otherwise their capacity for independent operations would have
been unduly constrained. Bas-reliefs appear to show personnel in ordinary
units employing bows.[128]

From about 218 BC onwards, the archers of the Roman army of the mid-Republic
were virtually all mercenaries from the island of Crete, which boasted a long
specialist tradition. During the late Republic (88–30 BC) and the Augustan
period, Crete was gradually eclipsed by men from other, much more populous,
regions subjugated by the Romans with strong archery traditions. These
included Thrace, Anatolia and, above all, Syria. Of the 32 _sagittarii_ units
attested in the mid-2nd century, 13 have Syrian names, 7 Thracian, 5 from
Anatolia, 1 from Crete and the remaining 6 of other or uncertain origin.[129]

Three distinct types of archers are shown on Trajan's Column: (a) with scalar
cuirass, conical steel helmet and cloak; (b) without armour, with cloth
conical cap and long tunic; or (c) equipped in the same way as general
auxiliary foot-soldiers (apart from carrying bows instead of javelins). The
first type were probably Syrian or Anatolian units; the third type probably
Thracian.[130] The standard bow used by Roman auxilia was the recurved
composite bow, a sophisticated, compact and powerful weapon.[128]

From about 218 BC onwards, the Republican army's slingers were exclusively
mercenaries from the Balearic Islands, which had nurtured a strong indigenous
tradition of slinging from prehistoric times. As a result, in classical Latin,
_Baleares_ (literally "inhabitants of the Balearic Islands") became an
alternative word for "slingers" ( _funditores_ , from _funda_ = "sling").
Because of this, it is uncertain whether the most of the imperial army's
slingers continued to be drawn from the Balearics themselves, or, like
archers, derived mainly from other regions.

Independent slinger units are not attested in the epigraphic record of the
Principate.[128] However, slingers are portrayed on Trajan's Column. They are
shown unarmoured, wearing a short tunic. They carry a cloth bag, slung in
front, to hold their shot ( _glandes_ ).[130]

_Exploratores_ ('reconnaissance troops', from _explorare_ = "to scout"). Two
examples include _numeri exploratorum_ attested to in the 3rd century in
Britain: _Habitanco_ and _Bremenio_ (both names of forts).[131] It is
possible, however, that more than 20 such units served in Britain.[132] The
literal translation of _numeri_ is 'numbers' and it was often used in the
context of a generic title for any unit that was not of a standard size or
structure. From the 2nd century onward they served as frontier guards, often
supplied by the Sarmatians and the Germans.[133] Little else is known about
such units.

Throughout the Principate period, there is evidence of ethnic units of
_barbari_ outside the normal auxilia organisation fighting alongside Roman
troops. To an extent, these units were simply a continuation of the old
client-king levies of the late Republic: _ad hoc_ bodies of troops supplied by
Rome's puppet petty-kings on the imperial borders for particular campaigns.
Some clearly remained in Roman service beyond the campaigns, keeping their own
native leadership, attire and equipment and structure. These units were known
to the Romans as _socii_ ("allies"), _symmachiarii_ (from _symmachoi_ , Greek
for "allies") or _foederati_ ("treaty troops" from _foedus_ , "treaty"). One
estimate puts the number of _foederati_ in the time of Trajan at about 11,000,
divided into about 40 _numeri_ (units) of about 300 men each. The purpose of
employing _foederati_ units was to use their specialist fighting skills.[134]
Many of these would have been troops of Numidian cavalry (see light cavalry
above).

The _foederati_ make their first official appearance on Trajan's Column, where
they are portrayed in a standardised manner, with long hair and beards,
barefoot, stripped to the waist, wearing long trousers held up by wide belts
and wielding clubs. In reality, several different tribes supported the Romans
in the Dacian wars. Their attire and weapons would have varied widely. The
Column stereotypes them with the appearance of a single tribe, probably the
most outlandish-looking, to differentiate them clearly from the regular
auxilia.[135] Judging by the frequency of their appearance in the Column's
battle scenes, the _foederati_ were important contributors to the Roman
operations in Dacia. Another example of _foederati_ are the 5,500 captured
Sarmatian cavalrymen sent by Emperor Marcus Aurelius (r. 161–180) to garrison
a fort on Hadrian's Wall after their defeat in the Marcomannic Wars.[136]

The evidence for auxiliary ranks and pay is scant: even less exists than the
patchy evidence for their legionary counterparts. There seems to be some
consensus, however, that the auxiliary was paid one third of what a legionary
received: 300 sesterces a year (400 after the reign of the emperor Commodus).
Both auxiliaries and seamen received the _viaticum_ of 300 sesterces, although
the various sources differ as to whether auxiliaries and sailors received the
retirement bonus[137] known as the _honesta missio_ , or honorable
discharge.[138][139]

The available data may be broken down and summarised as follows:

At the bottom end of the rank pyramid, rankers were known as _caligati_ (lit:
"sandal men" from the _caligae_ or hob-nailed sandals worn by soldiers).
Depending on the type of regiment they belonged to, they held the official
ranks of _pedes_ (foot soldier in a _cohors_ ), _eques_ (cavalryman in a
_cohors equitata_ ) and _gregalis_ ( _ala_ cavalryman).[141]

During the Principate, recruitment into the legions was restricted to Roman
citizens only. This rule, which derived from the pre-Social War Republican
army, was strictly enforced. The few exceptions recorded, such as during
emergencies and for the illegitimate sons of legionaries, do not warrant the
suggestion that the rule was routinely ignored.[142]

In the 1st century, the vast majority of auxiliary common soldiers were
recruited from the Roman _peregrine_ (second-class citizens). In the Julio-
Claudian era, conscription of _peregrini_ seems to have been practiced
alongside voluntary recruitment, probably in the form of a fixed proportion of
men reaching military age in each tribe being drafted.[143] From the Flavian
era onwards, the auxilia were an all-volunteer force.[144] Although recruits
as young as 14 are recorded, the majority of recruits (66%) were from the
18–23 age group.[145]

When it was first raised, an auxiliary regiment would have been recruited from
the native tribe or people whose name it bore. In the early Julio-Claudian
period, it seems that efforts were made to preserve the ethnic integrity of
units, even when the regiment was posted in a faraway province. But in the
later part of the period, recruitment in the region where the regiment was
posted increased and became predominant from the Flavian era onwards.[143] The
regiment would thus lose its original ethnic identity.[26] The unit's name
would thus become a mere curiosity devoid of meaning, although some of its
members might inherit foreign names from their veteran ancestors. This view
has to be qualified, however, as evidence from military diplomas and other
inscriptions shows that some units continued to recruit in their original home
areas e.g. Batavi units stationed in Britain, where some units had an
international membership.[74] It also appears that the Danubian provinces
(Raetia, Pannonia, Moesia, Dacia) remained key recruiting grounds for units
stationed all over the empire.[146][147]

It appears that Roman citizens were also regularly recruited to the auxilia.
Most likely, the majority of citizen recruits to auxiliary regiments were the
sons of auxiliary veterans who were enfranchised on their fathers'
discharge.[148] Many such may have preferred to join their fathers' old
regiments, which were a kind of extended family to them, rather than join a
much larger, unfamiliar legion. There are also instances of legionaries
transferring to the auxilia (to a higher rank).[149] The incidence of citizens
in the auxilia would thus have grown steadily over time until, after the grant
of citizenship to all _peregrini_ in 212, auxiliary regiments became
predominantly, if not exclusively, citizen units.

Less clearcut is the question of whether the regular auxilia recruited
_barbari_ (barbarians, as the Romans called people living outside the empire's
borders). Although there is little evidence of it before the 3rd century, the
consensus is that auxilia recruited barbarians throughout their
history.[96][150] In the 3rd century, a few auxilia units of clearly barbarian
origin start to appear in the record e.g. _Ala I Sarmatarum_ , _cuneus
Frisiorum_ and _numerus Hnaufridi_ in Britain.[151][152]

There existed a hierarchy of pay between types of auxiliary, with cavalry
higher paid than infantry. One recent estimate is that in the time of
Augustus, the annual pay structure was: _eques alaris_ ( _gregalis_ ) 263
_denarii_ , _eques cohortalis_ 225, and _cohors_ infantryman 188.[153] The
same differentials (of about 20% between grades) seem to have existed at the
time of Domitian (r. 81–96).[154] However, Goldsworthy points out that the
common assumption that rates of pay were universal across provinces and units
is unproven. Pay may have varied according to the origin of the unit.[155]

The remuneration of an auxiliary _pedes cohortalis_ may be compared to a
legionary's as follows:

Gross salary was subject to deductions for food, clothing, boots and hay
(probably for the company mules). It is unclear whether the cost of armour and
weapons was also deducted, or borne by the army. Deductions left the soldier
with a net salary of 78 _denarii_. This sum was sufficient, on the basis of
the food deduction, to amply feed an adult for a year. In 84 AD Domitian
increased basic legionary pay by 33% (from 225 to 300 _denarii_ ): a similar
increase was presumably accorded to auxiliaries, boosting their net income to
140 _denarii_ , i.e. more than two food allowances.[157] It was entirely
disposable, as the soldier was exempt from the poll tax ( _capitatio_ ), did
not pay rent (he was housed in fort barracks) and his food, clothing and
equipment were already deducted. It should be borne in mind that most recruits
came from peasant families living at subsistence level. To such persons, any
disposable income would appear attractive.[158] It could be spent on leisure
activities, sent to relatives or simply saved for retirement.

There is no evidence that auxiliaries received the substantial cash bonuses
(donativum) handed to legionaries on the accession of a new emperor and other
occasions.[159] Although irregular, these payments (each worth 75 _denarii_ to
a common legionary) averaged once every 7.5 years in the early 1st century and
every three years later. Duncan-Jones has suggested that _donativa_ may have
been paid to auxiliaries also from the time of Hadrian onwards, on the grounds
that the total amount of donative to the military increased sharply at that
time.[160] A very valuable benefit paid to legionaries was the discharge bonus
( _praemia_ ) paid on completion of the full 25 years' service. At 3,000
_denarii_ , this was equivalent to ten years' gross salary for a common
legionary after the pay increase of 84 AD. It would enable him to purchase a
substantial plot of land. Again, there is no indication that auxiliaries were
paid a discharge bonus. For auxiliaries, the discharge bonus was the grant of
Roman citizenship, which carried important tax exemptions. However, Duncan-
Jones argues that the fact that service in the auxilia was competitive with
the legions (deduced from the many Roman citizens that joined the auxilia)
that a discharge bonus may have been paid.[161]

Below centurion/decurion rank, junior officers in the Roman army were known as
_principales_. An auxiliary cohort's ranks appear the same as in a legionary
_centuria_. These were, in ascending order: _tesserarius_ ("officer of the
watch"), _signifer_ (standard-bearer for the _centuria_ ), _optio_
(centurion's deputy) and _vexillarius_ (standard-bearer for the whole
regiment, from _vexillum_ ). In the _turmae_ of _cohortes equitatae_ (and of
_alae_?), the decurion's second-in-command was probably known as a _curator_ ,
responsible for horses and caparison.[162] As in the legions, the
_principales_ , together with some regimental specialists, were classified in
two pay-scales: _sesquiplicarii_ ("one-and-a-half-pay men") and _duplicarii_
("double-pay men").[153] These ranks are probably most closely resembled by
the modern ranks of corporal and sergeant respectively.

Besides combat effectives, regiments also contained specialists, the most
senior of whom were _sesquiplicarii_ or _duplicarii_ , the rest common
soldiers with the status of _milities immunes_ ("exempt soldiers" i.e. exempt
from normal duties). Ranking specialists included the _medicus_ (regimental
doctor), _veterinarius_ (veterinary doctor, in charge of the care of horses,
pack animals and livestock), _custos armorum_ (keeper of the armoury), and the
_cornicularius_ (clerk in charge of all the regiment's records and
paperwork).[163]

The limited evidence on auxiliary _centuriones_ and _decuriones_ is that such
officers could be directly commissioned as well as promoted from the ranks.
Many appear to have come from provincial aristocracies.[164] Those rising from
the ranks could be promotions from the legions as well as from the regiment's
own ranks. In the Julio-Claudian period auxiliary _centuriones_ and
_decuriones_ were a roughly equal split between citizens and _peregrini_ ,
though later citizens became predominant due to the spread of citizenship
among military families.[149] Because _centuriones_ and _decuriones_ often
rose from the ranks, they have often been compared to warrant officers such as
sergeants-major in modern armies. However, centurions' social role was much
wider than a modern warrant-officer. In addition to their military duties,
centurions performed a wide range of administrative tasks, which was necessary
in the absence of an adequate bureaucracy to support provincial governors.
They were also relatively wealthy, due to their high salaries (see table
above).[165] However, most of the surviving evidence concerns legionary
centurions and it is uncertain whether their auxiliary counterparts shared
their high status and non-military role.[164]

There is little evidence about the pay-scales of auxiliary _centuriones_ and
_decuriones_ , but these are also believed to have amounted to several times
that of a _miles_.[165]

Unlike a _legatus legionis_ (who had an officer staff of 6 _tribuni militum_
and one _praefectus castrorum_ ), an auxiliary _praefectus_ does not appear to
have enjoyed the support of purely staff officers. The possible exception is
an attested _beneficiarius_ ("deputy"), who may have been the praefectus'
second-in-command, if this title was a regular rank and not simply an _ad hoc_
appointment for a specific task. Also attached to the _praefectus_ were the
regiment's _vexillarius_ (standard-bearer for the whole unit) and _cornucen_
(horn-blower).[162]

From a survey by Devijver of persons whose origin can be determined, it
appears that during the 1st century, the large majority (65%) of auxiliary
prefects were of Italian origin. The Italian proportion dropped steadily, to
38% in the 2nd century, and 21% in the 3rd century.[166] From the time of
emperor Claudius (r. 41–54) only Roman knights were eligible to hold command
of an auxiliary regiment. This status could be obtained either by birth (i.e.
if the person was the son of a hereditary Roman knight; or by attaining the
property qualification (100,000 _denarii_ , the equivalent of 400 years' gross
salary for an auxiliary _alaris_ ); or by military promotion: the latter were
the chief centurions of legions ( _centurio primus pilus_ ) who would normally
be elevated to equestrian rank by the emperor after completing their single-
year term as _primuspilus_.[167]

Equestrians by birth would normally begin their military careers at c. 30
years of age. An axillary had to do 25 years of service before joining the
army. Commands were held in a set sequence, each held for 3–4 years: prefect
of an auxiliary _cohors_ , _tribunus militum_ in a legion and finally prefect
of an auxiliary _ala_. In Hadrian's time, a fourth command was added, for
exceptionally able officers, of prefect of an _ala milliaria_. Like officers
senatorial rank, hereditary equestrians held civilian posts before and after
their decade of military service, whereas non-hereditary officers tended to
remain in the army, commanding various units in various provinces. By the 3rd
century, most auxiliary prefects had exclusively military careers.[167][168]

The pay of a _praefectus_ of an auxiliary regiment in the early 2nd century
has been estimated at over 50 times that of a _miles_ (common soldier).[111]
(This compares to a full colonel in the British Army, who is currently paid
about five times a private's salary).[169] The reason for the huge gap between
the top and the bottom of the pyramid is that Roman society was far more
hierarchical than a modern one. A _praefectus_ was not just a senior officer.
He was also a Roman citizen (which most of his men were not) and, as a member
of the equestrian order, an aristocrat. The social gulf between the
_praefectus_ and a _peregrinus_ soldier was thus immense, and the pay
differential reflected that fact.

The nomenclature of the great majority of regiments followed a standard
configuration: unit type, followed by serial number, followed by name of the
_peregrini_ tribe (or nation) from whom the regiment was originally raised, in
the genitive plural case e.g. _cohors III Batavorum_ ("3rd Cohort of Batavi");
_cohors I Brittonum_ ("1st Cohort of Britons"). Some regiments combine the
names of two _peregrini_ tribes, most likely after the merger of two
previously separate regiments e.g. _ala I Pannoniorum et Gallorum_ ("1st Wing
of Pannonii and Gauls"). A minority of regiments are named after an
individual, mostly after the first prefect of the regiment, e.g. _ala
Sulpicia_ (presumably named after a prefect whose middle ( _gens_ ) name was
Sulpicius). The latter is also an example of a regiment that did not have a
serial number.[170]

Regiments were often rewarded for meritorious service by the grant of an
honorific title. The most sought-after was the prestigious _c.R._ ( _civium
Romanorum_ = "of Roman citizens") title. In the latter case, all the
regiment's members at the time, but not their successors, would be granted
Roman citizenship. But the regiment would retain the c.R. title in perpetuity.
Another common title was the _gens_ name of the emperor making the award (or
founding the regiment) e.g. _Ulpia_ : the _gens_ name of Trajan (Marcus Ulpius
Traianus r.98–117). Other titles were similar to those given to the legions
e.g. _pia fidelis_ ( _p.f._ = "dutiful and loyal").[171]

The Roman army awarded a variety of individual decorations ( _dona_ ) for
valour to its legionaries. _Hasta pura_ was a miniature spear; _phalerae_ were
large medal-like bronze or silver discs worn on the cuirass; _armillae_ were
bracelets worn on the wrist; and torques were worn round the neck, or on the
cuirass. The highest awards were the _coronae_ ("crowns"), of which the most
prestigious was the _corona civica_ , a crown made of oak-leaves awarded for
saving the life of a Roman citizen in battle. The most valuable award was the
_corona muralis_ , a crown made of gold awarded to the first man to scale an
enemy rampart. This was awarded rarely, as such a man hardly ever
survived.[159]

There is no evidence that auxiliary common soldiers received individual
decorations, although auxiliary officers did. Instead, the whole regiment was
honoured by a title reflecting the type of award e.g. _torquata_ (awarded a
torque) or _armillata_ (awarded bracelets). Some regiments would, in the
course of time, accumulate a long list of titles and decorations e.g. _cohors
I Brittonum Ulpia torquata pia fidelis c.R._.[171]

Notes: (1) Table excludes about 2,000 officers (centurions and above). (2)
Auxiliary cavalry nos. assumes 70% of _cohortes_ were _equitatae_

**Analysis**

