The **Band of Pride** (BOP) is the official marching band which represents
Louisiana Tech University in Ruston, Louisiana. The Band of Pride performs
pregame and during halftime at all Louisiana Tech Bulldogs football games, and
travels (e.g., Bowl games, C-USA) to select road football games. Auditions are
held throughout the academic year as scheduled for the upcoming Fall Quarter.

**Hoop Troops** is the official basketball pep bands at Louisiana Tech
University. Hoop troops cover most all of both men's and women's basketball
home games and travels to select road basketball games, usually the C-USA
championships.

The Jazz activities and ensemble is directed by our **Jazz Studio**. The
studio has open auditions during the start of the Fall Quarter.

The Percussion ensemble is directed by our **Percussion Studio.** The studio
has open auditions for marching band as announced and music majors are
encouraged to apply early and schedule an audition with the studio director.

The Symphonic wind ensemble is directed by Mr. Jim Robken. Auditions for the
symphonic wind ensemble are open to music and non-music/band students from all
academic colleges on campus. The auditions are held at the end of Fall
Quarter. Concerts are held during the Winter and Spring Quarters.

The band is currently under the direction of Mr. Jim Robken (one of the
founding fathers of basketball bands, from his time as director of the
University of Arkansas Razorback Marching Band and the Hogwild Basketball Band
in the 1980s). Mr. Robken came to Louisiana Tech in 1991, where he brought his
ideas and enthusiasm with him.

The _Hoop Troop_ travels to all post-season games played by the _Bulldogs_
(men) and _Lady Techsters_ (women), and is known nationally as one of the best
basketball bands in college basketball. In the 2005 post-season, the _Hoop
Troop_ was featured in a _Sports Illustrated's College Edition_ article, "TOP
65 THINGS WE WANT TO SEE DURING MARCH MADNESS" in which states, "30) The
Louisiana Tech pep band, a.k.a. the Hoop Troop, the funniest band in the
land."[1] The _Hoop Troop_ was the only basketball band to be listed.

Mr. Robken or jRob as his students call him -- is best known around campus as
the man in the hat. His motto is "Oh Lord, it's hard to be Humble!" He is
quite humble when it comes to his talents as both a music composer and
marching band drill designer. His drill designs are intricately unique to Tech
Band and fans come from all over, especially from Arkansas, Mississippi, and
Texas to enjoy good music and great teamwork.

New band building was erected in 1968.

Missing band directors from (1906-1950) - please help contribute.

The Band of Pride participates in hundreds of events throughout the academic
year. Some of the events include Mardi Gras parades, Christmas parades and
much more.

  

