_**The Daily Star**_ is the largest circulating daily English-language
newspaper in Bangladesh.[1] Founded by Syed Mohammed Ali on 14 January 1991,
as Bangladesh transitioned and restored parliamentary democracy, _The Daily
Star_ emerged as a leading and influential national newspaper of record.[2][3]

Its motto, "Committed to People's Right to Know", appears on the above the
fold middle section of the front page. The newspaper is led by Mahfuz Anam, a
member of Mukti Bahini,[4] and former United Nations official.[5] Its
principal bureaus are located in Dhaka and Chittagong, with several
representatives abroad. It is organized into sections: News, Opinion and
Editorial, Star Business, Star Sports, Arts and Entertainment, National and
Metropolitan. Its major supplements include _The Star_ , _Forum_ , _Lifestyle_
, _Star Literature_ , _Law & Our Rights_, _Shout_ , _Star Insight_ and
_Science and Life_.

_The Daily Star_ is owned by Mediaworld, in which a major share is held by
Latifur Rahman's Transcom Group.[6] The Transcom Group also owns _Prothom Alo_
, one of the most widely read Bengali newspapers in the world.[7]

Mahfuz Anam, editor and publisher of _The Daily Star_ , is also on its six-
member board of directors, of which Rokeya Afzal Rahman is chairman. The board
deals with financial matters.[8]

The general section of the newspaper is headed by Dr Salehuddin Ahmed,[8] its
managing editor, while the news team is led by Syed Ashfaqul Haque, chief news
editor.[9] Ahmed Ali is in charge of the Metro. Other leaders are AFM
Jamaluddin (establishment manager), Mizanur Rahman (accounts manager), Selim
S.H. Chowdhury (production and events manager), and Sher Ali (advertising
manager).[9]

The online version of _The Daily Star_ as a leading English daily newspaper of
Bangladesh is updating 24/7 with latest, breaking, politics, business,
technology, world, entertainment, sports, lifestyle and crime news.[ _citation
needed_ ]

_The Daily Star_ publishes a number of supplements along with its 24-page main
publication.

In 2016, speaking at a panel discussion on ATN News, editor Mahfuz Anam
admitted that _The Daily Star_ ran stories fed to the newspaper by military
intelligence outfit DGFI in 2007 and 2008. The stories accused eventual prime
minister Sheikh Hasina of corruption.[10] This led to demands in parliament by
several lawmakers calling for the trial of Mahfuz Anam and _The Daily Star_
publisher Latifur Rahman.[11]

The online website had been blocked on 1 June without any notice by Bangladesh
Telecommunication Regulatory Commission (BTRC). It had been unblocked after 18
hours. BTRC didn't explain why it had taken that type of steps but the media
and public of Bangladesh thought that as the media run a news regarding
alleged killing of Teknaf municipal councillor Akramul Haque the authority had
taken the steps.[12]

