The **Black Reel Awards** , or " **BRAs** ", is an annual American awards
ceremony hosted by the Foundation for the Augmentation of African-Americans in
Film (FAAAF) to recognize excellence of African-Americans, as well as the
cinematic achievements of the African diaspora, in the global film industry,
as assessed by the Foundation’s voting membership. The various category
winners are awarded a copy of a statuette, officially called the Black Reel
Award. The awards, first presented in 2000 in Washington, DC, are overseen by
FAAAF.

The awards ceremony was initially awarded online during its first two years
before the first live show presentation in 2002. The awards have broadcast to
radio since 2014. The Black Reel Awards is the oldest cinema-exclusive awards
ceremony for African-Americans.

The 18th Annual Black Reel Awards ceremony was held on February 22, 2018. A
total of 315 Black Reel Awards have been presented since the inception of the
award through its 18th edition.

Founded by film critic Tim Gordon and Sabrina McNeal in 2000, the first annual
Black Reel Awards presentation was held on February 16, 2000 online courtesy
of Reel Images Magazine.[1] Two years later, the third annual Black Reel
Awards held its first live presentation at a private dinner function at the
Cada Vez in Washington, DC with an audience of about 150 people. Twenty
statuettes were awarded, honoring African-American artists, directors and
other participants in the filmmaking industry, for their works in 2001. The
ceremony ran for 90 minutes.

In subsequent years, the Black Reel Awards have largely been presented in the
nation’s capital, with the exception of one year when the awards were moved to
New York. The awards have been presented live several times: the fourth annual
Black Reel Awards presentation was held at H20 on the Southwest waterfront in
Washington, DC with an audience of about 200 people; the sixth annual Black
Reel Awards presentation was held at the French Embassy with an audience of
about 350 people; and the thirteenth annual Black Reel Awards presentation was
held at the MIST Harlem with an audience of about 200 people.

Initially winners were announced online. Later, the live awards presentations
would use a sealed envelope to reveal the name of each winner.

The Black Reel Awards benefit **The Foundation for the Advancement of African-
Americans in Film** (FAAAF), a non-profit arts organization whose mission is
to provide educational opportunities to future minority film executives.
Through the FAAAF programs "Reel Kids," and "Producer's Institute,"
scholarships are awarded to minority junior high, high school and college
graduate students pursuing careers in the movie and television industries.

In 2015, the Foundation changed its name to **The Foundation for the
Augmentation of African-Americans in Film**.[2]

The first Outstanding Actor award was given to Denzel Washington for his
performance in _The Hurricane_.[3] He subsequently received the same honor the
next two years, for his performances in _Remember the Titans_ and _Training
Day_.[4][5]

At the 3rd Annual Black Reel Awards ceremony, held on February 16, 2002, the
Outstanding Foreign Film category was introduced.

The 6th Annual Black Reel Awards, held in 2005, presented the first Vanguard
Award for entertainer of the year to Jamie Foxx for his performances in
_Collateral_, _Redemption: The Stan Tookie Williams Story_ , and _Ray_.

Each of the Black Reel Awards ceremonies has ended with the Black Reel Award
for Outstanding Film.

In 2005, three categories, Outstanding Actor, Outstanding Actress, as well as
Outstanding Film awards were split into two separate categories (Drama and
Musical/Comedy). In addition, the Outstanding Original Television Program was
discontinued in 2005 and later expanded and resurfaced in 2015 as the
Outstanding Television Documentary or Special category.

The Special Black Reel Awards are voted on by special Foundation committees,
rather than by the Voting Academy membership as a whole. They are not always
presented on a consistent annual basis.

Below are the Motion Picture and Television films with 5 or more nominations.
_Black Panther_ holds the record for the most wins for a single film with 10
categorical wins, and also holds the record for the most nominated film with
17 nominations. _12 Years a Slave_ and _Selma_ are tied for second place with
8 wins apiece. On the television side, _Lackawanna Blues_ holds the record for
most nominations with 9 and wins 7 for a television film.

**17 Nominations**

**14 nominations**

**13 nominations**

**12 nominations**

**11 nominations**

**10 nominations**

**9 nominations**

**8 nominations**

**7 nominations**

**6 nominations**

**5 nominations**

This is a list of multiple nominated performers, producers, writers &
directors with 5 or more career nominations as of 2016. Spike Lee holds the
record with 27 nominations as a producer, director and writer.

**27 nominations**

**15 nominations**

**12 nominations**

**11 nominations**

**10 nominations**

**9 nominations**

**8 nominations**

**7 nominations**

**6 nominations**

**5 nominations**

Here are the individuals with the most wins, as of the 2016 ceremony.

