The **Boeing EA-18G Growler** is an American carrier-based electronic warfare
aircraft, a specialized version of the two-seat F/A-18F Super Hornet. The
EA-18G replaced the Northrop Grumman EA-6B Prowlers in service with the United
States Navy. The Growler's electronic warfare capability is primarily provided
by Northrop Grumman. The EA-18G began production in 2007 and entered
operational service with the US Navy in late 2009. Australia has also
purchased twelve EA-18Gs, which entered service with the Royal Australian Air
Force in 2017.

On 15 November 2001, Boeing successfully completed an initial flight
demonstration of F/A-18F "F-1" fitted with the ALQ-99 electronic warfare
system to serve as the EA-18 Airborne Electronic Attack (AEA) concept
aircraft.[4] In December 2003, the US Navy awarded a development contract for
the EA-18G to Boeing. As primary contractor, Boeing was to construct the
forward fuselage, wings and perform the final assembly. Northrop Grumman was
the principal airframe subcontractor and they would supply the center and aft
fuselage as well as the principal electronic combat system.[1][5] In 2003, the
Navy expected to receive 90 EA-18Gs.[6]

The first EA-18G test aircraft entered production on 22 October 2004.[7] The
first test aircraft, known as EA-1, was rolled out on 3 August 2006, before
making its maiden flight at St. Louis on 15 August 2006; it was later ferried
to Naval Air Station Patuxent River, Maryland on 22 September 2006.[8][9] EA-1
primarily supports ground testing in the Air Combat Environment Test and
Evaluation Facility (ACETEF) anechoic chamber.

The second aircraft (EA-2) first flew on 10 November 2006,[10] and was
delivered to NAS Patuxent River on 29 November 2006.[11] EA-2 is an AEA flight
test aircraft, initially flying on Pax River's Atlantic Test Range (ATR) for
developmental test of the AEA system before transitioning to the Electronic
Combat Range (ECR, or 'Echo Range') in Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake in
California. Both aircraft are assigned to VX-23 "Salty Dogs". EA-1 and EA-2
are F/A-18Fs F-134 and F-135, pulled from the St. Louis production line and
modified by Boeing to the EA-18G configuration. However, since they were not
built initially as Growlers, the Navy has designated these two test aircraft
as NEA-18Gs.[12] There were five Growlers flying in the flight test program as
of June 2008.[13]

In an April 2006 report, the U.S. Government Accountability Office expressed
concerns. The GAO felt the electronic warfare systems on the EA-18G were not
fully mature so there is a risk of "future cost growth and schedule delays".
The report recommended that the DoD consider purchasing additional ICAP III
upgrades for EA-6Bs to fill any current and near-term capability gaps and
restructure the initial EA-18G production plans so that procurement takes
place after the aircraft has "demonstrated full functionality".[14] In a 2008
GAO report, the director of the DoD's Operational Test and Evaluation
department questioned the workload on the two-person Growler crew to replace
the Prowler's crew of four.[15]

The U.S Navy has ordered a total of 57 aircraft to replace its in-service
EA-6B Prowlers, most of which will be based at NAS Whidbey Island. The US DoD
gave approval for the EA-18G program to begin low-rate initial production in
2007.[16] The EA-18G was scheduled to finish flight testing in 2008.[17] The
Navy planned to buy approximately 85 aircraft in 2008.[18] Approval for full-
rate production was expected in the third quarter of 2009,[19] and was given
on 23 November 2009. Boeing planned to ramp up production to 20 aircraft per
year.[20] On 9 July 2009, General James Cartwright told the United States
Senate Committee on Armed Services that the choice had been to continue the
F/A-18 production line because the warfighting commanders needed more aerial
electronic warfare capability that only the EA-18G could provide.[21]

The Navy's submission for the 2011 defense budget put forth by the Obama
Administration calls for four EA-18G Growler squadrons to be added to the
fleet.[22] On 14 May 2010, Boeing and the US Department of Defense reached an
agreement for a multi-year contract for an additional 66 F/A-18E/Fs and 58
EA-18Gs over the next four years. This will raise the total to 114 EA-18Gs on
order.[23]

The Pentagon's Director of Operational Test and Evaluation determined that the
EA-18G was "still not operationally suitable" in February 2011. Prime
contractor Boeing is working to address issues with software updates.[24] In
December 2011, Operational Test and Evaluation concluded that the EA-18G
software was "operationally effective and suitable".[25]

On 19 December 2014, the Navy publicly reported that it wants to modify the
production contract with Boeing to slow production of the Growler from three
airplanes per month to two. It will also purchase an additional 15 Growlers,
funded by a spending bill that will go to President Obama for signature in
late December 2014. Boeing would then be able to continue running the St.
Louis production line through 2017. Boeing has said it cannot sustain the
production line at fewer than two airplanes per month.[26]

The Growler's flight performance is similar to that of the F/A-18E/F. This
attribute enables the Growler to perform escort jamming as well as the
traditional standoff jamming mission (Radar jamming and deception). Growlers
are able to accompany F/A-18s during all phases of an attack mission.[27] In
order to give the Growler more stable flight for the electronic warfare
mission, Boeing changed the leading edge fairings and wing fold hinge
fairings, and added wing fences and aileron "tripper strips".[28]

The Growler has more than 90% in common with the standard Super Hornet,
sharing airframe, Raytheon AN/APG-79 AESA radar and weapon systems such as the
AN/AYK-22 stores management system. Most of the dedicated airborne electronic
attack equipment is mounted in the space that used to house the internal 20 mm
cannon and on the wingtips. Nine weapons stations remain free to provide for
additional weapons or jamming pods.[29] The added electronics include
AN/ALQ-218 wideband receivers on the wingtips and ALQ-99 high and low-band
tactical jamming pods. The ALQ-218 combined with the ALQ-99 form a full
spectrum electronic warfare suite that is able to provide detection and
jamming against all known surface-to-air threats.[27] However, the current
pods may be inadequate against emerging threats.[30]

The EA-18G can be fitted with up to five ALQ-99 jamming pods and will
typically add two AIM-120 AMRAAM or AGM-88 HARM missiles.[5] The EA-18G will
also use the INCANS Interference Cancellation system that will allow voice
communication while jamming enemy communications, a capability not available
on the EA-6B.[31] In addition to the radar warning and jamming equipment, the
Growler possesses a communications receiver and jamming system that will
provide suppression and electronic attack against airborne communication
threats.[29]

The poor reliability of the ALQ-99 jammer pod and frequent failures of the
Built-In Test (BIT) have caused the crew to fly missions with undetected
faults. The ALQ-99 has also interfered with the aircraft's AESA radar and has
imposed a high workload on the two-man crew, along with reducing the Growler's
top speed.[32]

Boeing is looking into other potential upgrades; the ALQ-99 radar jamming pod
may be replaced in the future, and the company is looking into adding weapons
and replacing the satellite communications receiver. The Growler is the
initial platform for the Next Generation Jammer (NGJ) which uses Active
electronically scanned array (AESA) technology to focus jamming power exactly
where needed. The NGJ was to be implemented on the F-35.[6] However, in May
2012, the U.S. Navy decided to focus NGJ integration on the EA-18G for an
expected in-service date of 2020, and defer work for the F-35.[33] Boeing is
also looking at exporting a Growler Lite configuration without the jamming
pods for electronic awareness rather than electronic attack.[34]

Three Growlers networked together can generate targeting tracks for hostile
radio-frequency sources in real time, but this is difficult to arrange with
the current minimum strength US Navy squadrons.[35] Utilizing faster data-
links, the Growler could use its EW pods to accurately locate signal sources.
In a group of three planes, when one detects a signal from a source such as a
cell phone, the other two can also listen for the same signal, all three
measuring the amount of time taken for transmissions to travel from the source
to each aircraft to triangulate the location in "a very, very small area."[36]
By early 2015, the Navy had demonstrated this concept using EA-18s equipped
with Rockwell Collins' tactical targeting network technology (TTNT) and
ALQ-218 receivers to acquire emissions from a target vessel and target it from
a stand-off range without using their own detectable radar emissions.[37]
Boeing announced on 1 December 2015 that they would upgrade Navy EA-18Gs with
the TTNT datalink.[38]

Following U.S. Navy missions in Operation Odyssey Dawn during the 2011 Libyan
Revolution, the Royal Australian Air Force decided to add the Raytheon ATFLIR
(forward looking infrared) pod to their order of 12 Growler aircraft. When
Navy EA-18Gs' radar and radar detectors located possible targets, they passed
the information through datalinks to strike fighters. However, the Growlers
themselves lacked the ability to visually confirm what it detected, so adding
a FLIR pod gives it visual acuity to see targets and shorten the kill chain;
it is not known if the U.S. Navy will also add a FLIR pod. Australian EA-18Gs
will also be equipped with the AIM-9X Sidewinder missile.[39]

The first Growler for fleet use was officially accepted by VAQ-129 "Vikings"
at NAS Whidbey Island, on 3 June 2008.[18] The Navy planned to buy
approximately 85 aircraft to equip 11 squadrons as of 2008.[18] The EA-18G
completed operational evaluation in late July 2009. The Growler was rated
operationally effective and suitable for operational use.[19][40] On 5 August
2009, EA-18G Growlers from Electronic Attack Squadron 129 (VAQ-129) and
Electronic Attack Squadron 132 (VAQ-132) completed their first at-sea carrier-
arrested landing aboard the USS _Harry S. Truman_ (CVN-75).[41]

The first deployable EA-18G squadron was VAQ-132 "Scorpions", which reached
operational status in October 2009.[42] The first Growler operational
deployment was announced on 17 February 2011.[43] In service, the EA-18's
radio name during flight operations will be "Grizzly". The "Growler" nickname
sounded too much like the EA-6B's "Prowler" name, so "Grizzly" will be used to
avoid confusion.[44] By May 2011, 48 Growlers had been delivered to the U.S.
Navy.[29]

With the termination of the EB-52H standoff jammer, the Growler became the
sole remaining manned tactical jammer. Air Staff requirements director Maj.
Gen. David Scott has indicated that the USAF will seek to provide electronic
warfare officers to fly on U.S. Navy Growlers, without providing funding to
purchase additional aircraft.[45] U.S. Air Force personnel of 390th Electronic
Combat Squadron stationed at NAS Whidbey Island have been supporting and
flying the Growler.[46]

The EA-18G was first used in combat during Operation Odyssey Dawn, enforcing
the UN no-fly zone over Libya in 2011.[47][48] Five EA-18Gs were redeployed
from Iraq to support operations in Libya in 2011.[49]

In 2008, the Australian Government requested export approval from the US
government to purchase up to six EA-18Gs,[50] which would be part of the order
for 24 F/A-18F Super Hornets.[51]

On 27 February 2009, Defence Minister Joel Fitzgibbon announced that 12 of the
24 Super Hornets on order would be wired on the production line for future
fit-out as EA-18Gs. The additional wiring would cost A$35 million.[52][53] On
23 August 2012, the Australian Government announced that 12 RAAF Super Hornets
would be fitted with Growler capability at a cost of $1.5 billion,[54] making
the Royal Australian Air Force the only military other than the U.S. to
operate the Growler's electronic jamming equipment.[55]

On 3 May 2013, the Australian Government announced that it will buy 12 new-
build Growlers to supplement the existing Super Hornet fleet.[56] Australia
took delivery of the first of 12 Growlers on 29 July 2015.[57] Uniquely,
Australian Growlers will be equipped with the AN/ASQ-228 ATFLIR targeting pod
and will also have additional air-to-air weapons in the form of the AIM-9X
missile.[58] The aircraft will be operated by No. 6 Squadron RAAF.[59] On 7
July 2017, the RAAF completed delivery of the 12 EA-18G Growlers with the
arrival of the last Growler at RAAF Base Amberley, home of No. 6 Squadron
RAAF.[60] One of the Australian EA-18Gs was written off following an engine
fire in January 2018, leaving the force with 11 of the type.[61]

On 29 January 2018, an Australian EA-18G caught fire after an aborted takeoff
from Nellis Air Force Base, Nevada while participating in Exercise Red Flag
2018\. The crew were able to exit the jet on the ground unharmed without
ejecting.[64] The aircraft was withdrawn from service and written off on 15
August 2018.[65]

_Data from_ Boeing brochure[66] and U.S. Navy F/A-18E/F fact file.[67]

 **General characteristics**

**Performance**

**Armament**  

**Avionics**  

**Related development**

**Aircraft of comparable role, configuration and era**

**Related lists**

