A sighted child who is reading at a basic level should be able to understand
common words and answer simple questions about the information presented.[1]
They should also have enough fluency to get through the material in a timely
manner. Over the course of a child's education, these foundations are built on
to teach higher levels of math, science, and comprehension skills.[1] Children
who are blind not only have the education disadvantage of not being able to
see: they also miss out on the very fundamental parts of early and advanced
education if not provided with the necessary tools.

In 1960, 50 percent of legally blind school-age children in the United States
were able to read Braille.[2][3] According to the 2007 _Annual Report_ from
the American Printing House for the Blind, there are approximately 57,696
legally blind children in the U.S. Out of those school-age children, only 10
percent use Braille as their primary reading medium.[4] There are numerous
causes for the decline in Braille usage, including school budget constraints,
technology advancement, and different philosophical views over how blind
children should be educated.[5]

A major turning point for Braille literacy was the passage by the United
States Congress of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, which moved thousands of
children from specialized schools for the blind into mainstream public
schools.[3] Because only a small percentage of public schools could afford to
train and hire Braille-qualified teachers, Braille literacy has declined since
the law took effect.[3] Braille literacy rates have improved slightly since
the bill was passed, in part because of pressure from consumers and advocacy
groups that have led 27 states to pass legislation mandating that children who
are legally blind be given the opportunity to learn braille.[5]

In 1998-99 there were approximately 55,200 legally blind children in the
United States, but only 5,500 of them used braille as their primary reading
medium.[6][7] Early Braille education is crucial to literacy for a visually
impaired child. A study conducted in the state of Washington found that people
who learned braille at an early age did just as well as, if not better than,
their sighted peers in several areas, including vocabulary and comprehension.
In the preliminary adult study, while evaluating the correlation between adult
literacy skills and employment, it was found that 44 percent of the
participants who had learned to read in Braille were unemployed, compared to
the 77 percent unemployment rate of those who had learned to read using
print.[8]

Currently, among the estimated 85,000 blind adults in the United States[
_citation needed_ ], 90 percent of those who are braille literate are
employed. Among adults who do not know Braille, only 1 in 3 is employed.[3]
Statistically, history has proven that braille reading proficiency provides an
essential skill set that allows visually impaired children not only to compete
with their sighted peers in a school environment, but also later in life as
they enter the workforce.[5]

Hadley is the largest educator of braille as well as the largest worldwide
provider of distance education for people who are blind or visually impaired.
Braille literacy has been a priority for Hadley since its founding in 1920,
and to this day, braille courses are still the most popular. During the 2010
fiscal year, Hadley enrolled nearly 3,400 students in braille reading and
writing courses alone (combined sighted and blind students). Hadley currently
offers 14 braille courses taught by 11 highly trained instructors. Nine
courses are focused on tactile learners, and Hadley also provides five courses
for sighted individuals, including families and professionals in the field.

Hadley School has advanced the use of braille in a number of ways over the
years, including being one of the first institutions to use the Thermoform
Duplicator, which copies braille from paper to a Brailon (a sheet of durable
plastic) and one of the first to use a computer-driven, high-speed braille
printer. A longtime leader in braille production, Hadley produces more than
50,000 braille pages each year, supplementing mass brailling done offsite. For
a modest fee, Hadley provides braille transcription services in accordance
with the Braille Authority of North America. Transcribers are certified by the
National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped.

The National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped (NLS) of
the Library of Congress has contracted with the National Federation of the
Blind (NFB) to offer a certificate of proficiency for braille transcribers and
proofreaders who are interested in working in their communities to produce
Braille materials for blind people. Certified Braille volunteers transcribe
material into Braille that is used by state departments of special education,
NLS, and libraries that distribute books and magazines through the NLS
program. These volunteers complete a detailed course of Braille transcribing
and provide essential materials in the advancement of Braille literacy.[9]

The NLS also offers a broad range of Braille literacy information and
resources including braille books, software, and other material intended to
assist with the production of braille. This information can be very helpful
for family members, friends, and professionals who desire information about
braille literacy. They provide educational resources for instructors who teach
braille as well as those who are interested in learning to read and write
Braille.

The ReadBooks! program from National Braille Press distributes free braille
literacy bags in the U.S. and Canada to families with blind children, birth to
age 7. The program introduces blind children to braille at the earliest age
and encourages families to read print/braille books together. Since the
inception of the program in 2001, over 9,000 braille literacy bags have been
distributed in English or Spanish.

ReadBooks! bags contain age-appropriate print-braille books; a primer for
sighted parents to learn braille; tactile literacy objects/games; waxed string
for drawing; and a guide for parents on why and how to read books with their
young blind child. Print-braille books are standard print books, like _Miss
Nelson Is Missing_ or _Corduroy_ , with braille text added on transparent
plastic sheets so everyone can read together. National Braille Press works
with educators and early intervention professionals to identify families who
could benefit from the book bags; families can request their own bags. There
is increasing evidence that parental beliefs and attitudes about reading and
the opportunities parents provide their children in reading can greatly
influence children's reading development. Parents can help their children
prepare by providing a braille-rich environment in the home.[10]

The Dots for Tots program aims to engage and strengthen the senses of a
visually impaired child. This is important to get them prepared for reading
and interested in literacy.[11] The free program offers free books and kits to
promote literacy among blind children of preschool and early elementary age.
The dots in this program are very important and parallel with the literacy
requirements of a sighted child learning their ABCs. It also helps grab a
blind child's interest in the same way that a picture book encourages literacy
for a sighted child.[12]

The program equips schools and educators with the tools to ensure that
children who are blind receive the same quality of education that their
sighted peers do. It helps remove education barriers as well as ease the fears
that many children have of facing school with a handicap.[13]

This program provides visually impaired children with books that have been
printed in Braille. Children are able to follow along with the rest of their
classmates when reading popular children's books in libraries, at home, or in
a school environment. Dots for Tots provide an entire book kit that includes
the children's book in braille, a tape with a professional descriptive
narration with sound effects, and a set of three-dimensional toys that allow
them to understand the importance of visualizing stories with their
fingers.[14]

The American Foundation for the Blind (AFB) offers the Connecting the Dots
resource for parents to promote early Braille literacy. The program provides a
folder containing fact sheets about braille, resource lists, and information
for parents about braille, organizations that promote braille literacy,
sources of braille books and magazines, adapted materials, and other
information intended to promote literacy development.[15]

The Instant Access to Braille program, supported through US Department of
Education Office of Special Education Programs CFDA 84.00327A, provides blind
and visually impaired students with access to learning materials in braille to
support braille literacy efforts in general education classrooms. This program
provides portable braille note-taking devices to students to train students as
well as assist educators, parents, and school administrators overcome the
barriers of teaching special needs children and ensuring that students receive
the equivalent education opportunities that sighted children receive. The
program also provides assistance with converting their printed learning
materials into electronic format so that visually impaired students are not at
disadvantaged in the school environment.

The Instant Access program is intended to assist students in grades 3-10 that
use New York State curriculum and is focused on academics related mainly to
Social Studies. There is no charge for the Braille note-taking devices, disk
drives, printers or setup of the equipment. The program is a one-year school-
based project and can be adjusted to take full advantage of features that will
benefit the student and support the education process.[16]

The Braille Challenge is an annual two-stage competition to motivate blind
students to emphasize their study of Braille.[17] The program parallels the
importance and education purpose of a spelling bee for sighted children. In
the competition, students transcribe and read Braille using a Perkins
Brailler. Their speed and accuracy, reading comprehension, ability to decode
charts and graphs, and spelling are tested.[18]

The Braille Challenge started locally in 2000 sponsored by Braille Institute
to help encourage and promote students' braille skills.[19] In 2003 Braille
Institute began partnering with other organizations and formed an advisory
committee to make the Braille Challenge accessible to all kids across the
United States and Canada. That year, 200 students from 28 states and four
Canadian provinces traveled to participate in the regional events, sending 55
finalists to Los Angeles to compete for the 2003 Braille Challenge title.[19]
Participation in the contest has doubled since 2003.

By 2005 the institute received 775 requests for the preliminary contest,
representing students from 40 states and six Canadian provinces.[19] In 2009,
31 blind service agencies and schools for the blind and visually impaired
throughout the United States and Canada are hosting regional events.[20] Over
500 students participated regionally in 2009, with the national top 12 scores
in each of the five age groups scheduled to compete nationally at the final
round held at the Braille Institute in Los Angeles.[21]

The American Action Fund for Blind Children and Adults provides specially-made
"Twin Vision" children's books with both Braille and written English.[22] The
dual encoding allows both adults and children who are visually impaired to
read along with a person who is not visually impaired.[23]

