**Bryan Andrew Garner** (born 1958) is an American lawyer, lexicographer, and
teacher who has written more than two dozen books about English usage and
style[1] as well as advocacy.[2][3] He also wrote two books with Justice
Antonin Scalia: _Making Your Case: The Art of Persuading Judges_ (2008) and
_Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts_ (2012).

The founder and president of LawProse Inc.,[4] he serves as Distinguished
Research Professor of Law at Southern Methodist University Dedman School of
Law.[5]

Garner was born on November 17, 1958,[ _citation needed_ ] in Lubbock,
Texas,[6] and raised in Canyon, Texas. He attended the University of Texas at
Austin, where he published excerpts from his senior thesis, notably
"Shakespeare's Latinate Neologisms"[7] and "Latin-Saxon Hybrids in Shakespeare
and the Bible".[8][9][10][11][12][13]

After receiving his Bachelor of Arts degree, Garner entered the University of
Texas School of Law, where he served as an associate editor of the _Texas Law
Review_.

After receiving his Juris Doctor degree in 1984, he clerked for Judge Thomas
M. Reavley of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit before he joined
the Dallas firm of Carrington, Coleman, Sloman & Blumenthal. He then returned
to the University of Texas School of Law and was named director of the
Texas/Oxford Center for Legal Lexicography.

In 1990, he left the university to found LawProse Inc., which provides
seminars on clear writing, briefing and editing for lawyers and judges.[14]

Garner has taught at the University of Texas School of Law, the University of
California at Berkeley (Boalt Hall), Texas Tech University School of Law, and
Texas A&M University School of Law. He has been awarded three honorary
doctorates (Stetson, La Verne, and Thomas M. Cooley Law School). He serves on
the Board of Advisers of _The Green Bag_.[15]

As a student at the University of Texas School of Law in 1981, Garner began
noticing odd usages in lawbooks, many of them dating back to Shakespeare. They
became the source material for his first book, _A Dictionary of Modern Legal
Usage_ (1987).[16] Since 1990, his work has focused on teaching the legal
profession clear writing techniques.

In books, articles,[17] [18][19][20][21] and lectures, Garner has tried to
reform the way bibliographic references are "interlarded" (interwoven) in the
midst of textual analysis. He argues for putting citations in footnotes and
notes that in-text information that is important but non-bibliographic. He
opposes references such as "457 U.S. 423, 432, 102 S.Ct. 2515, 2521, 89
L.Ed.2d 744, 747" as interruptions in the middle of a line. However, such
interruptions in judges' opinions and in lawyers' briefs have remained the
norm. Some courts and advocates around the country have begun adopting
Garner's recommended style of footnoted citations, and a surprising degree of
internal strife has resulted within some organizations. For example, one
appellate judge in Louisiana refused to join in a colleague's opinions written
in the new format.[22]

Garner says that one of the main reasons for the reform is to make legal
writing more comprehensible to readers who lack a legal education. That has
attracted opposition, most notably from Judge Richard Posner of the U.S. Court
of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit,[23] and from his co-author, Justice
Antonin Scalia.[24]

Since 1992, Garner has contributed numerous revisions to the field of
procedural rules, when he began revising all amendments to the sets of Federal
Rules (Civil, Appellate, Evidence, Bankruptcy, and Criminal) for the Judicial
Conference of the United States.

Garner and Justice Scalia wrote _Making Your Case: The Art of Persuading
Judges_ (2008). Garner maintains a legal consulting practice, focusing on
issues in statutory construction and contractual interpretation.

Garner's books on English usage include _Garner's Modern English Usage_. In
2003, he contributed a chapter on grammar and usage to the 15th edition of
_The Chicago Manual of Style_ , and later editions have retained it.

In 1995, Garner became the editor in chief of _Black's Law Dictionary_. He
created a panel of international legal experts to improve the specialized
vocabulary in the book. Garner and the panel rewrote and expanded the
dictionary's lexicographic information.

Only current editions are shown.

