_**Cafundó**_ (Portuguese pronunciation: [kafũˈdɔ]), or _**Cupópia**_
([kuˈpɔpjɐ]), is an argot ("secret language") spoken in the Brazilian village
of Cafundó, São Paulo, now a suburb of Salto de Pirapora. The language is
structurally similar to Portuguese, with many Bantu words in its lexicon.

Cafundó was at first thought to be an African language, but a later study
(1996) by Carlos Vogt and Peter Fry showed that its grammatical and
morphological structure are those of Brazilian Portuguese, specifically the
rural hinterland Southeastern variety, _caipira_. Whereas its lexicon is
heavily drawn from some Bantu language(s). It is therefore not a creole
language, as it is sometimes considered. In contrast to Vogt and Fry (1996),
Álvarez López and Jon-And (2017) suggests that when speakers code-switch from
Cafundó Portuguese to Cupópia, they produce something different from a
contemporary regional variety of Portuguese with a number of African-derived
words.[3] Rather, the passages in which Cupópia is used comprise specific
grammatical features, suggesting that the variety has its own grammar.

The name _cafundó_ means "a remote place" or "a hard-to-reach place",
referring to the quilombo of Cafundó. The Brazilian film _Cafundó_ also takes
its name from the same location.

The speaker community is very small (40 people in 1978). They live in a rural
area, 150 km from the city of São Paulo, and are mostly of African descent.
They also speak Portuguese, and use _cafundó_ as a "secret" home language. A
_cafundó_ speaker and an African-born Bantu (Angolan or Mozambican) speaking
Portuguese and Bantu languages can understand each other, because Angolan and
Mozambican Portuguese also have their particular Bantu-derived
characteristics.[ _citation needed_ ]

