**California Fried Chicken** (CFC) is an Indonesian fast food restaurant
chain, serving principally fried chicken. Its major competitors are KFC,
McDonald's, A&W, and Texas Chicken and as of March 2019 it runs 269 locations
across Indonesia.[1]

The chain, established in 1983 in Jakarta as a franchise of the American-based
Pioneer Take Out,[1][2][3] has an American name and is now entirely Indonesian
owned.[4] [5] The chain is supplied by the same group, the Sierad Group, which
also supplies chicken to Wendy's and Kentucky Fried Chicken.[2]

It is the main brand of PT Pioneerindo Gourmet International Tbk which was
listed on the Jakarta Stock Exchange in 1994. The firm also runs Sapo Oriental
and Cal Donat outlets in Jakarta, and employs 1,400 people.[1] Studies
conducted by the _Jakarta Post_ reveal that it is the fifth most popular fast
food chain in Indonesia after Restoran Sederhana, KFC, McDonald's and Pizza
Hut.[6] As the westernization of Indonesia took off in the 1990s, California
Fried Chicken took advantage of the growth of American-style malls in the
country, reaching 90 by 1998.[7] It is now common to see branches of the chain
in malls or near supermarkets, often in direct competition with neighboring
branches of the global brands of the above-mentioned and Dunkin'
Donuts.[8][9][10][11][12]

According to an article in Adweek, California Fried Chicken was founded by 3
Indonesians who wanted to introduce the taste of Pioneer Chicken to their
homeland that they had enjoyed during their stay in California while attending
the University of Southern California.[3]

The Los Angeles Times mentioned that California Fried Chicken had stores in
China during the 1990s.[13] However, these stores do not appear to currently
exist.

In 2008, the firm opened new outlets in Salatiga and Central Java, marketed in
a way which meets local demands by serving traditional Indonesian food staples
of fried noodles and rice with chicken.[14]

The logo and marketing of California Fried Chicken is very similar to that of
a carriage. Like the KFC logo, CFC uses red and white with the letters CFC and
features a cartoon old western white and blue wagon in a yellow circular
background.[15] Its advertising slogan is "Bukan Cuma Ayam" which is featured
in the logo, meaning "Not Only Chicken".

Although the chain has become a major success, it has not been without its
criticism as globalization of American culture takes full swing.[16] It has
been criticized for "being a KFC clone".[17]

