In linguistics, a **calque** /kælk/ or **loan translation** is a word or
phrase borrowed from another language by literal, word-for-word or root-for-
root translation. Used as a verb, "to calque" means to borrow a word or phrase
from another language while translating its components, so as to create a new
lexeme in the target language.

"Calque" itself is a loanword from the French noun _calque_ ("tracing;
imitation; close copy"); the verb _calquer_ means "to trace; to copy, to
imitate closely"; _papier calque_ is "tracing paper".[1] The word "loanword"
is itself a calque of the German word _Lehnwort_ , just as "loan translation"
is a calque of _Lehnübersetzung_.[2]

Proving that a word is a calque sometimes requires more documentation than
does an untranslated loanword because, in some cases, a similar phrase might
have arisen in both languages independently. This is less likely to be the
case when the grammar of the proposed calque is quite different from that of
the borrowing language, or when the calque contains less obvious imagery.

Calquing is distinct from phono-semantic matching.[3] While calquing includes
semantic translation, it does not consist of phonetic matching (i.e. retaining
the approximate sound of the borrowed word through matching it with a similar-
sounding pre-existing word or morpheme in the target language).

One system classifies calques into five groups:[4]

This terminology is not universal. Some authors call a morphological calque a
"morpheme-by-morpheme translation".[7]

Other linguists refer to the **phonological calque** , where the pronunciation
of a word is imitated in the other language.[8] For example, the English word
_"radar"_ becomes the similar-sounding Chinese word 雷达 (pinyin _"léi dá"_ ).

**Loan blends** or **partial calques** translate some parts of a compound, but
not others.[9] For example, the name of the Irish digital television service
Saorview is a partial calque of that of the UK service Freeview, translating
the first half of the word from English to Irish but leaving the second half
unchanged. Other examples are: "liverwurst" (< German _Leberwurst_ ), "apple
strudel" (< German _Apfelstrudel_ ).

The common English phrase "flea market" is a loan translation of the French
_marché aux puces_ ("market with fleas").[10] Other national variations
include:

An example of a common morpheme-by-morpheme loan-translation in a multitude of
languages is that of the English word _skyscraper_ :

The Latin word _translātiō_ "a transferring" derives from _transferō_ "to
transfer", from _trans_ "across" + _ferō_ "bear". The Germanic languages and
some Slavic languages calqued their words for "translation" from the Latin
word _translātiō_ , substituting their respective Germanic or Slavic root
words for the Latin roots.

The remaining Slavic languages instead calqued their words for "translation"
from an alternative Latin word _trāductiō_ , itself derived from _trādūcō_
("to lead across" or "to bring across", from _trans_ "across" + _dūcō_ , "to
lead" or "to bring").[11]

The West Slavic languages adopted the _translātiō_ pattern. The East Slavic
languages (except for Belarusian and Ukrainian) and the South Slavic languages
adopted the _trāductiō_ pattern.

The Romance languages, deriving directly from Latin, did not need to _calque_
their equivalent words for "translation". Instead, they simply adapted the
second of the two alternative Latin words, _trāductiō_. Thus, Aragonese:
_traducción_ ; Catalan: _traducció_ ; French: _traduction_ ; Italian:
_traduzione_ ; Portuguese: _tradução_ ; Romanian: _traducere_ ; and Spanish:
_traducción_.

The English verb "to translate" was borrowed from the Latin _translātiō_ ,
rather than being calqued.[11] Were the English verb "translate" calqued, it
would be "overset", akin to the calques in other Germanic languages.

Following are the Germanic- and Slavic-language calques for "translation":[11]

The computer mouse was named in English for its resemblance to the animal.
Many other languages have extended their own native word for "mouse" to
include the computer mouse.

