**Mario Fortino Alfonso Moreno Reyes** , known casually as **Mario Moreno**
and professionally as **Cantinflas** (12 August 1911 – 20 April 1993), was a
Mexican film actor, producer, and screenwriter. He is considered to have been
the most accomplished Mexican comedian and is celebrated throughout Latin
America and in Spain. His humor, loaded with Mexican linguistic features of
intonation, vocabulary, and syntax, is beloved in all the Spanish-speaking
countries of Latin America and in Spain and has given rise to a range of
expressions including _cantinflear_ , _cantinflada_ , _cantinflesco_ , and
_cantinflero_.

Though some of his films were translated into English and French, the word
games so particular in Mexican Spanish were difficult to translate. He often
portrayed impoverished farmers or a peasant of _pelado_ origin.[1] The
character allowed Cantinflas to establish a long, successful film career that
included a foray into Hollywood. Charlie Chaplin once commented that he was
the best comedian alive,[2][3] and Moreno has been referred to as the "Charlie
Chaplin of Mexico".[4] To audiences in the United States, he is best
remembered as co-starring with David Niven in the Academy Award winner for
Best Picture film _Around the World in 80 Days_ , for which Moreno won a
Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy.

As a pioneer of the cinema of Mexico, Moreno helped usher in its golden era.
In addition to being a business leader, he also became involved in Mexico's
tangled and often dangerous labor politics. His reputation as a spokesperson
for the downtrodden gave his actions authenticity and became important in the
early struggle against _charrismo_ , the one-party government's practice of
co-opting and controlling unions.[ _citation needed_ ]

Moreover, his character Cantinflas, whose identity became enmeshed with his
own, was examined by media critics, philosophers, and linguists, who saw him
variously as a danger to Mexican society, a bourgeois puppet, a verbal
innovator, and a picaresque underdog.[ _citation needed_ ]

Mario Fortino Alfonso Moreno Reyes was born in the Santa María la Redonda
neighbourhood of Mexico City, and grew up in the tough neighbourhood of
Tepito. He was one of eight children born to Pedro Moreno Esquivel, an
impoverished mail carrier, and María de la Soledad Reyes Guízar (from Cotija,
Michoacan). The others were Pedro, José ("Pepe"), Eduardo, Esperanza,
Catalina, Enrique, and Roberto.[5]

He made it through difficult situations with the quick wit and street smarts
that he would later apply in his films. His comic personality led him to a
circus tent show, and from there to legitimate theatre and film.

He married Valentina Ivanova Zubareff, of Russian ethnicity, on 27 October
1936 and remained with her until her death in January 1966. A son was born to
Moreno in 1961 by another woman;[6] the child was adopted by Valentina Ivanova
and was named Mario Arturo Moreno Ivanova, causing some references to
erroneously refer to him as "Cantinflas' adopted son".[7] Moreno Ivanova died
on 15 May 2017, of a presumed heart attack.[8]

He served as president of one of the Mexican actors' guilds known as
_Asociación Nacional de Actores_ (ANDA, "National Association of Actors") and
as first secretary general of the independent filmworkers' union _Sindicato de
Trabajadores de la Producción Cinematográfica_ (STPC).[ _citation needed_ ]
Following his retirement, Moreno devoted his life to helping others through
charity and humanitarian organizations, especially those dedicated to helping
children. His contributions to the Roman Catholic Church and orphanages made
him a folk hero in Mexico.[ _citation needed_ ]

He was a Freemason, initiated at Chilam Balam Lodge.[9][10]

In 1961, Cantinflas appeared with Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson at shopping
centers and supermarkets in San Antonio, Texas, to support the successful
Democratic nominee to the United States House of Representatives for Texas'
20th congressional district, Henry B. Gonzalez, who defeated his Republican
challenger, John W. Goode. Gonzalez was the first Hispanic elected to the
Texas State Senate and as a U.S. congressman from Texas.[11]

A lifelong smoker, Cantinflas died of lung cancer on 20 April 1993 in Mexico
City. Thousands appeared on a rainy day for his funeral. The ceremony was a
national event, lasting three days. His body lay in state in the _Rotonda de
Las Personas Ilustres_ (The Rotunda of Illustrious Persons, formerly known as
Rotunda of Illustrious Men)[12] and he was honored by many heads of state and
the United States Senate, which held a moment of silence for him.

A 20-year legal battle followed between Mario Moreno Ivanova, Cantinflas' son
and heir to his estate, and the actor's blood nephew Eduardo Moreno Laparade
over the control of 34 films made by Cantinflas. The nephew claimed his uncle
gave him a written notice[ _clarification needed_ ] to the rights for movies
on his deathbed. Moreno Ivanova argued that he was the direct heir of
Cantinflas and that the rights belonged to him. Moreno Laparade won the
lawsuit twice,[13] but Moreno Ivanova eventually triumphed after two
appeals.[14] In 2005, Mario Moreno Ivanova, Jr. won the rights to 39 films and
the name.[ _citation needed_ ]

At the same time, there was another legal battle between Columbia Pictures and
Moreno Ivanova over control of these films. Columbia claimed that it had
bought the rights to the 34 films four decades earlier, although the court
noted several discrepancies in the papers. Moreno Ivanova wanted the rights to
the films to remain his, and more generally Mexico's, as a national treasure.
On 2 June 2001 the eight-year battle was resolved with Columbia retaining
ownership over the 34 disputed films.[15]

As a young man, Cantinflas performed a variety of acts in travelling tents,
and it was here that he acquired the nickname "Cantinflas". According to one
obituary, "Cantinflas" is a meaningless name invented to prevent his parents
from knowing he was in the entertainment business, which they considered a
shameful occupation. Cantinflas confirmed it in 1992, in his last television
interview.[16]

Before starting his professional life in entertainment, he explored a number
of possible careers, such as medicine and professional boxing, before joining
the entertainment world as a dancer. By 1930 he was involved in Mexico City's
_carpa_ (travelling tent) circuit, performing in succession with the Ofelia,
Sotelo of Azcapotzalco, and finally the Valentina _carpa_ , where he met his
future wife. At first he tried to imitate Al Jolson by smearing his face with
black paint, but later separated himself to form his own identity as an
impoverished slum dweller with baggy pants, a rope for a belt, and a
distinctive mustache.[17] In the tents, he danced, performed acrobatics, and
performed roles related to several different professions.

In the mid-1930s, Cantinflas met publicist and producer Santiago Reachi and
subsequently partnered with him to form their own film production venture.
Reachi produced, directed, and distributed, while Cantinflas acted. Cantinflas
made his film debut in 1936 with _No te engañes corazón_ ( _Don't Fool
Yourself Dear_ ) before meeting Reachi, but the film received little
attention. Reachi established Posa Films in 1939 with two partners: Cantinflas
and Fernandez. Before this, Reachi produced short films that allowed him to
develop the Cantinflas character, but it was in 1940 that he finally became a
movie star, after shooting _Ahí está el detalle_ ("There's the rub", literally
"There lies the detail"), with Sofía Álvarez, Joaquín Pardavé, Sara García,
and Dolores Camarillo. The phrase that gave that movie its name became a
"Cantinflas" (or catchphrase) for the remainder of his career. The film was a
breakthrough in Latin America and was later recognized by _Somos_ magazine as
the 10th greatest film produced largely in Mexico.[18]

In 1941, Moreno first played the role of a police officer on film in _El
gendarme desconocido_ ("The Unknown Police Officer" a play on words on "The
Unknown Soldier). By this time, he had sufficiently distinguished the
_peladito_ character from the 1920s-era _pelado_ , and his character flowed
comfortably from the disenfranchised, marginalized, underclassman to the
empowered public servant. The rhetoric of _cantinflismo_ facilitated this
fluidity.[ _citation needed_ ] He would reprise the role of Agent 777 and be
honored by police forces throughout Latin America for his positive portrayal
of law enforcement.

_Ni sangre, ni arena_ ("Neither Blood, nor Sand" a play on words on the
bullfighter/gladiator phrase _Blood and Sand_ ), the 1941 bullfighting film,
broke box-office records for Mexican-made films throughout Spanish-speaking
countries. In 1942, Moreno teamed up with Reachi, Miguel M. Delgado, and Jaime
Salvador to produce a series of low-quality parodies, including an
interpretation of Chaplin's _The Circus_.[ _citation needed_ ]

The 1940s and 1950s were Cantinflas' heyday. In 1941, Reachi, the Producer
rejected Mexican Studios companies and instead paid Columbia Pictures to
produce the films in its Studios in Hollywood.[17] By this time, Cantinflas'
popularity was such that he was able to lend his prestige to the cause of
Mexican labor, representing the National Association of Actors in talks with
President Manuel Ávila Camacho. The talks did not go well, however, and, in
the resulting scandal, Moreno took his act back to the theatre.[ _citation
needed_ ]

On 30 August 1953, Cantinflas began performing his theatrical work _Yo Colón_
("I, Columbus") in the _Teatro de los Insurgentes_ , the same theatre that had
earlier been embroiled in a controversy over a Diego Rivera mural
incorporating Cantinflas and the Virgin of Guadalupe. Critics, including the
PAN and archbishop Luis María Martínez, called the mural blasphemous, and it
was eventually painted without the image of the Virgin.

_Yo Colón_ placed Cantinflas in the character of Christopher Columbus, who,
while continually "discovering America", made comedic historical and
contemporary observations from fresh perspectives. For the first few months,
he persuaded the King and Queen of Spain to fund his voyage so that he could
let his wife "drive" so she could make a wrong turn and discover Mexico
instead, allowing him to also discover Jorge Negrete so that the Queen – an
ardent fan – could meet him. When Negrete died just before Christmas of 1953,
he changed it first to Pedro Infante until his death four years later, and
then finally to Javier Solis until his death in 1966.

In 1956, _Around the World in 80 Days_ , Cantinflas' American debut, earned
him a Golden Globe for Best Actor in a musical or comedy.[19] Variety magazine
said in 1956 that his Chaplinesque quality made a big contribution to the
success of the film.[20] The film ultimately made an unadjusted $42 million at
the box office[21] (over $678 million in 2018 dollars). While David Niven was
billed as the lead in English-speaking nations, Cantinflas was billed as the
lead elsewhere. As a result of the film, Cantinflas became the world's
highest-paid actor.[22]

Moreno's second Hollywood feature, _Pepe_ , attempted to replicate the success
of his first. The film had cameo appearances by Frank Sinatra, Judy Garland
and other stars. His humor, deeply rooted in the Spanish language, did not
translate well for the American audience and the movie was a notorious box
office disappointment. He still earned a Golden Globe nomination for his part.
Later in a 1992 American interview, Moreno cited the language barrier as the
biggest impediment to his making it big in the United States.[23]

After returning to Mexico, Cantinflas starred in the comic drama _El bolero de
Raquel_ (1957), the first Cantinflas film to be distributed to the United
States by Columbia Pictures. The film was followed by more Cantinflas-Reachi-
Columbia productions: _El analfabeto_ (1961), _El padrecito_ (1963), and _Su
excelencia_ (1967). After _Su excelencia_ , Cantinflas began to appear in a
series of very low-budget comedies directed by Miguel M. Delgado, which were
produced by his own company "Cantinflas Films". These films lasted until _El
Barrendero_ , in 1982.

Like Charlie Chaplin, Cantinflas was a social satirist. He played _el pelado_
, an impoverished Everyman, with hopes to succeed. With mutual admiration,
Cantinflas was influenced by Chaplin's earlier films and ideology. _El Circo_
(the circus) was a "shadow" of Chaplin's silent film, _The Circus_ and _Si yo
fuera diputado_ ("If I Were a Congressman") had many similarities with the
1940 film, _The Great Dictator_. Cantinflas' films, to this day, still
generate revenue for Columbia Pictures. In 2000, Columbia reported in an
estimated US$4 million in foreign distribution from the films.[17]

Among the things that endeared him to his public was his comic use of language
in his films; his characters (all of which were really variations of the main
"Cantinflas" persona but cast in different social roles and circumstances)
would strike up a normal conversation and then complicate it to the point
where no one understood what they were talking about. The Cantinflas character
was particularly adept at obfuscating the conversation when he owed somebody
money, was courting an attractive young woman, or was trying to talk his way
out of trouble with authorities, whom he managed to humiliate without their
even being able to tell. This manner of talking became known as _Cantinflear_
, and it became common parlance for Spanish speakers to say " _¡estás
cantinfleando!_ " (loosely translated as you're pulling a "Cantinflas!" or
you're "Cantinflassing!") whenever someone became hard to understand in
conversation. The Real Academia Española officially included the verb,
_cantinflear_ , _cantinflas_ and _cantinflada_[24] in its dictionary in 1992.

In the visual arts, Mexican artists such as Rufino Tamayo and Diego Rivera
painted Cantinflas as a symbol of the Mexican everyman.

Cantinflas' style and the content of his films have led scholars to conclude
that he influenced the many _teatros_ that spread the message of the Chicano
Movement during the 1960s-1970s in the United States, the most important of
which was El Teatro Campesino. The _teatro_ movement was an important part of
the cultural renaissance that was the social counterpart of the political
movement for the civil rights of Mexican Americans. Cantinflas' use of social
themes and style is seen as a precursor to Chicano theater.[25]

A cartoon series, the _Cantinflas Show_ , was made in 1972 starring an
animated Cantinflas. The show was targeted for children and was intended to be
educational.[26] The first animated version animated by Santiago Moro and his
brother Jose Luis Moro for Televisa in the early 1970s (Cantinflas Show) which
educated children by meeting such notable people such as Chopin, Louis
Pasteur, Albert Einstein and William Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet as well
learning how important water and oil is and educational parodies of some of
his famous movies like _Su Excelencia_ [La Carta with incidental music from
Aaron Copland's El Salón México] In the second version his character was known
as " _Little Amigo_ " and concentrated on a wide range of subjects intended to
educate children, from the origin of soccer to the reasons behind the
International Date Line. The second animated series animated in 1979 and
dubbed in English in 1982 was a joint venture between Televisa and Hanna-
Barbera and Mario Moreno voiced "Little Amigo"/Cantinflas in the Spanish
version and Don Messick voiced "Little Amigo" and John Stephenson as the
narrator in the English version. Both The Cantinflas Show and Amigos and
Friends aired in the mid 1990s on Univision and Televisa re aired The
Cantinflas Show in the mid 1990s.

Although Cantinflas never achieved the same success in the United States as in
Mexico, he was honored with a motion pictures star on the Hollywood Walk of
Fame at 6438 Hollywood Boulevard.[27] He earned two Golden Globe nominations
(winning one) for best actor and the Mexican Academy of Film Lifetime
Achievement Award.[4][28] His handprints have been imbedded onto the Paseo de
las Luminarias for his work in motion pictures.

The Mario Moreno "Cantinflas" Award is handed out annually for entertainers
who "represent the Latino community with the same humor and distinction as the
legendary Mario Moreno "Cantinflas" and who, like Cantinflas, utilizes his
power to help those most in need".[29]

On August 12, 2018, the Google Doodle paid homage to Cantinflas on his 107th
birth anniversary.[30]

Moreno's life is the subject of the biographical film _Cantinflas_ (2014,
directed by Sebastian del Amo). It stars Óscar Jaenada, who portrays a young
Mario Moreno attempting to gain respect and make a living as an actor, and
award-winning actor Michael Imperioli as Mike Todd, an American film-producer
struggling to film his masterpiece. The film is centered in Moreno's personal
life, and in the development of Todd's Golden Globe Award-winning 1956 film
_Around the World in 80 Days_.[31]

Cantinflas is sometimes seen as a Mexican Groucho Marx character, one who uses
his skill with words to puncture the pretensions of the wealthy and powerful,
the police and the government, with the difference that he strongly supported
democracy. Historian and author of _Cantinflas and the Chaos of Mexican
Modernity_ , writes, "Cantinflas symbolized the underdog who triumphed through
trickery over more powerful opponents" and presents Cantinflas as a self-image
of a transitional Mexico. Gregorio Luke, executive director of the Museum of
Latin American Art said, "To understand Cantinflas is to understand what
happened in Mexico during the last century".[17][32]

Monsiváis interprets Moreno's portrayals in terms of the importance of the
spoken word in the context of Mexico's "reigning illiteracy" (70% in 1930).
Particularly in the film _El analfabeto_ , ( _The Illiterate_ ), "Cantinflas
is the illiterate who takes control of the language by whatever means he
can".[33]

The journalist Salvador Novo interprets the role of Moreno's character
entirely in terms of _Cantinflismo_ : " _En condensarlos: en entregar a la
saludable carcajada del pueblo la esencia demagógica de su vacuo
confusionismo, estriba el mérito y se asegura la gloria de este hijo cazurro
de la ciudad ladina y burlona de México, que es 'Cantinflas'_ ". ("In
condensing them [the leaders of the world and of Mexico], in returning to the
healthy laughter of the people the demagogic essence of their empty confusion,
merit is sustained and glory is ensured for the self-contained son of the
Spanish-speaking mocker of Mexico, who Cantinflas portrays.")[34]

In his biography of the comic, scholar of Mexican culture Jeffrey M. Pilcher
views Cantinflas as a metaphor for "the chaos of Mexican modernity", a
modernity that was just out of reach for the majority of Mexicans: "His
nonsense language eloquently expressed the contradictions of modernity as 'the
palpitating moment of everything that wants to be that which it cannot
be'."[35] Likewise, "Social hierarchies, speech patterns, ethnic identities,
and masculine forms of behavior all crumbled before his chaotic humor, to be
reformulated in revolutionary new ways."[36]

