**Castell Coch** (Welsh pronunciation: [ˈkastɛɬ koːχ]; Welsh for Red Castle)
is a 19th-century Gothic Revival castle built above the village of Tongwynlais
in South Wales. The first castle on the site was built by the Normans after
1081, to protect the newly conquered town of Cardiff and control the route
along the Taff Gorge. Abandoned shortly afterwards, the castle's earth motte
was reused by Gilbert de Clare as the basis for a new stone fortification,
which he built between 1267 and 1277 to control his freshly annexed Welsh
lands. This castle was likely destroyed in the native Welsh rebellion of 1314.
In 1760, the castle ruins were acquired by John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute, as
part of a marriage settlement that brought the family vast estates in South
Wales.

John Crichton-Stuart, the 3rd Marquess of Bute, inherited the castle in 1848.
One of Britain's wealthiest men, with interests in architecture and
antiquarian studies, he employed the architect William Burges to reconstruct
the castle, "as a country residence for occasional occupation in the summer",
using the medieval remains as a basis for the design. Burges rebuilt the
outside of the castle between 1875 and 1879, before turning to the interior;
he died in 1881 and the work was finished by Burges's remaining team in 1891.
Bute reintroduced commercial viticulture into Britain, planting a vineyard
just below the castle, and wine production continued until the First World
War. The Marquess made little use of his new retreat and in 1950 his grandson,
the 5th Marquess of Bute, placed it into the care of the state. It is now
controlled by the Welsh heritage agency Cadw.

Castell Coch's external features and the High Victorian interiors led the
historian David McLees to describe it as "one of the greatest Victorian
triumphs of architectural composition."[1] The exterior, based on 19th-century
studies by the antiquarian George Clark, is relatively authentic in style,
although its three stone towers were adapted by Burges to present a dramatic
silhouette, closer in design to mainland European castles such as Chillon than
native British fortifications. The interiors were elaborately decorated, with
specially designed furniture and fittings; the designs include extensive use
of symbolism drawing on classical and legendary themes. Joseph Mordaunt Crook
wrote that the castle represented "the learned dream world of a great patron
and his favourite architect, recreating from a heap of rubble a fairy-tale
castle which seems almost to have materialised from the margins of a medieval
manuscript." [2]

The surrounding beech woods contain rare plant species and unusual geological
features and are protected as a Site of Special Scientific Interest.

The first castle on the Castell Coch site was probably built after 1081,
during the Norman invasion of Wales.[3][4] It formed one of a string of eight
fortifications intended to defend the newly conquered town of Cardiff and
control the route along the Taff Gorge.[4] It took the form of a raised,
earth-work motte, about 35 metres (115 ft) across at the base and 25 metres
(82 ft) on the top, protected by the surrounding steep slopes.[5] The 16th-
century historian Rice Merrick claimed that the castle was built by the Welsh
lord Ifor ap Meurig, but there are no records of this phase of the castle's
history and modern historians doubt this account.[6][7] The first castle was
probably abandoned after 1093 when the Norman lordship of Glamorgan was
created, changing the line of the frontier.[4]

In 1267, Gilbert de Clare, who held the Lordship of Glamorgan, seized the
lands around the town of Senghenydd in the north of Glamorgan from their
native Welsh ruler.[4][3][8] Caerphilly Castle was built to control the new
territory and Castell Coch—strategically located between Cardiff and
Caerphilly—was reoccupied.[4][8] A new castle was built in stone around the
motte, comprising a shell-wall, a projecting circular tower, a gatehouse and a
square hall above an undercroft.[3][9] The north-west section of the walls was
protected by a talus and the sides of the motte were scarped to increase their
angle, all producing a small but powerful fortification.[4] Further work
followed between 1268 and 1277, which added two large towers, a turning-bridge
for the gatehouse and further protection to the north-west walls.[10][a]

On Gilbert's death, the castle passed to his widow Joan and around this time
it was referred to as _Castrum Rubeum_ , Latin for "the Red Castle", probably
after the colour of the Red sandstone defences.[12][13] Gilbert's son, also
named Gilbert, inherited the property in 1307.[14] He died at the Battle of
Bannockburn in 1314, triggering an uprising of the native Welsh in the
region.[14] Castell Coch was probably destroyed by the rebels in July 1314,
and possibly slighted to put it beyond any further use; it was not rebuilt and
the site was abandoned.[14][15]

Castell Coch remained derelict; the antiquarian John Leland, visiting around
1536, described it as "all in ruin, no big thing but high".[14] The artist and
illustrator Julius Caesar Ibbetson painted the castle in 1792, depicting
substantial remains and a prominent tower, with a lime kiln in operation
alongside the fortification.[16][17] Stone from the castle may have been
robbed and used to feed the kilns during this period.[18] A similar view was
sketched by an unknown artist in the early 19th century, showing more trees
around the ruins; a few years later, Robert Drane recommended the site as a
place for picnics and noted its abundance in wild garlic.[17][19][20]

The ruins were acquired by the Earls of Bute in 1760, when John Stuart, the
3rd Earl and, from 1794, the 1st Marquess, married Lady Charlotte Windsor,
adding her estates in South Wales to his inheritance.[21] John's grandson,
John Crichton-Stuart, developed the Cardiff Docks in the first half of the
19th century; although the docks were not especially profitable, they opened
opportunities for the expansion of the coal industry in the South Wales
valleys, making the Bute family extremely wealthy.[21][22] The 2nd Marquess
carried out exploration for iron ore at Castell Coch in 1827 and considered
establishing an ironworks there.[23]

The 3rd Marquess of Bute, another John Crichton-Stuart, inherited the castle
and the family estates as a child in 1848.[24][25] On his coming of age,
Bute's landed estates and industrial inheritance made him one of the
wealthiest men in the world.[26] He had a wide range of interests including
archaeology, theology, linguistics and history.[26] Interest in medieval
architecture increased in Britain during the 19th century, and in 1850 the
antiquarian George Clark surveyed Castell Coch and published his findings, the
first major scholarly work about the castle.[17] The ruins were covered in
rubble, ivy, brushwood and weeds; the keep had been largely destroyed and the
gatehouse was so covered with debris that Clark failed to discover it.[17][27]
Nonetheless, Clark considered the external walls "tolerably perfect" and
advised that the castle be conserved, complete with the ivy-covered
stonework.[28]

In 1871, Bute asked his chief Cardiff engineer, John McConnochie, to excavate
and clear the castle ruins.[29][b] The report on the investigations was
produced by William Burges, an architect with an interest in medieval
architecture[29] who had met Bute in 1865. The Marquess subsequently employed
him to redevelop Cardiff Castle in the late 1860s, and the two men became
close collaborators.[30][31] Burges's lavishly illustrated report, which drew
extensively on Clark's earlier work, laid out two options: either conserve the
ruins or rebuild the castle to create a house for occasional occupation in the
summer.[32][33][34][35] On receipt of the report, Bute commissioned Burges to
rebuild Castle Coch in a Gothic Revival style.[32][33]

The reconstruction of Castell Coch was delayed until 1875, because of the
demands of work at Cardiff Castle and an unfounded concern by the Marquess's
trustees that he was facing bankruptcy.[36] On commencement, the Kitchen
Tower, Hall Block and shell wall were rebuilt first, followed by the Well
Tower and the Gatehouse, and the Keep Tower last.[37][33] Burges's drawings
for the proposed rebuilding survive at the Bute seat of Mount Stuart.[34] The
drawings were supplemented by a large number of wooden and plaster models,
from smaller pieces to full-size models of furniture.[38][c]

The bulk of the external work was complete by the end of 1879. The result
closely followed Burges's original plans, with the exception of an additional
watch tower intended to resemble a minaret, and some defensive timber
hoardings, both of which were not undertaken.[33][37][39] Clark continued to
advise Burges on historical aspects of the reconstruction and the architect
tested the details of proposed features, such as the drawbridge and
portcullis, against surviving designs at other British castles.[40][41]

—Extract from the report of William Burges on Castell Coch.[42]

Burges's team of craftsmen at Castell Coch included many who had worked with
him at Cardiff Castle and elsewhere.[43] John Chapple, his office manager,
designed most of the furnishings and furniture,[43] and William Frame acted as
clerk of works.[43] Horatio Lonsdale was Burges's chief artist, painting
extensive murals at the castle.[43] His main sculptor was Thomas Nicholls,
together with another long-time collaborator, the Italian sculptor Ceccardo
Fucigna.[43]

Stimulated by antiquarian writings about British viticulture, Bute decided to
reintroduce commercial grape vines into Britain in 1873.[44] He sent his
gardener Andrew Pettigrew to France for training and planted a 1.2-hectare
(3-acre) vineyard just beneath the castle in 1875.[44][45] The first harvests
were poor and the initial harvest in 1877 produced only 240 bottles.[46][47]
_Punch_ magazine claimed that any wine produced would be so unpleasant that
"it would take four men to drink it—two to hold the victim and one to pour the
wine down his throat".[45][47][48] By 1887, the output was 3,000 bottles of
sweet white wine of reasonable quality.[48][49][50] Bute persevered,
commercial success followed and 40 hogsheads of wine, including a red varietal
using Gamay grapes, were produced annually by 1894 to positive
reviews.[48][49][50][51]

Burges died in 1881 after catching a severe chill during a site visit to the
castle.[52][d] His brother-in-law, the architect Richard Pullan, took over the
commission and delegated most of the work to Frame, who directed the work on
the interior until its completion in 1891.[1][52] Bute and his wife Gwendolen
were consulted over the details of the interior decoration; replica family
portraits based on those at Cardiff were commissioned to hang on the
walls.[54][55] Clark approved of the result, commenting in 1884 that the
restoration was in "excellent taste".[56] An oratory originally built on the
roof of the Well Tower was removed before 1891 but in other respects the
completed castle was left unaltered.[57]

The castle was not greatly used; the Marquess rarely visited after its
completion.[1] The property had probably only been intended for limited,
informal use, for example as a retreat following picnics. Although it had
reception rooms suitable for large gatherings, it had only three bedrooms and
was too far from Cardiff for casual visits.[58][36][e] The restored castle
initially received little interest from the architectural community, possibly
because the total rebuilding of the castle ran counter to the increasingly
popular late-Victorian philosophy of conserving older buildings and
monuments.[60]

Bute died in 1900 and his widow, the Marchioness, was given a life interest in
Castell Coch; during her mourning, she and her daughter, Lady Margaret
Crichton-Stuart, occupied the castle and made occasional visits
thereafter.[1][61] Production in the castle vineyards ceased during the First
World War due to the shortages of the sugar needed for the fermentation
process, and in 1920 the vineyards were uprooted.[48] John, the 4th Marquess,
acquired the castle in 1932 but made little use of it.[58] He also began to
reduce the family's investments in South Wales.[62] The coal trade had
declined after 1918 and industry had suffered during the depression of the
1920s;[63][64] by 1938, the great majority of the family interests, including
the coal mines and docks, had been sold off or nationalised.[62]

The 5th Marquess of Bute, another John, succeeded in 1947 and, in 1950, he
placed the castle in the care of the Ministry of Works. The Marquess also
disposed of Cardiff Castle, which he gave to the city, removing the family
portraits from the castle before doing so. In turn, the paintings in Castell
Coch were removed by the ministry and sent to Cardiff,[55] the National Museum
of Wales providing alternatives from their collection for Castell Coch.[55]
Academic interest in the property grew, with publications in the 1950s and
1960s exploring its artistic and architectural value.[65]

Since 1984, the property has been administered by Cadw, an agency of the Welsh
Government, and is open to the public; it received 69,466 visitors in
2011.[66] The Drawing Room is available for wedding ceremonies.[67] The castle
has also been used as a location for filming.[68]

The castle's exposed position causes it to suffer from penetrating damp and
periodic restoration work has been necessary.[54][69] The stone tiles on the
roof were replaced by slate in 1972, a major programme was carried out on the
Keep in 2007 and interior conservation work was undertaken in 2011 to address
problems in Lady Bute's Bedroom, where damp had begun to damage the
finishings.[54][69][70][71]

The original furnishings, many of which the Marquess removed in 1950, have
mostly been recovered and returned to their original locations in the
castle.[1] Two stained-glass panels from the demolished chapel, lost since
1901, were rediscovered at an auction in 2010 and were bought by Cadw for
£125,000 in 2011.[72]

Castell Coch occupies a stretch of woodland on the slopes above the village of
Tongwynlais and the River Taff, about 10.6 kilometres (6.6 mi) north-west of
the centre of Cardiff.[73][74] The architecture is High Victorian Gothic
Revival in style, influenced by contemporary 19th-century French
restorations.[75] Its design combines the surviving elements of the medieval
castle with 19th-century additions to produce a building which the historian
Charles Kightly considered "the crowning glory of the Gothic Revival" in
Britain. It is protected under UK law as a Grade I listed building due to its
exceptional architectural and historical interest.[30][71][75][76]

The castle comprises three circular towers—the Keep, the Kitchen Tower and the
Well Tower—along with the Hall Block, the Gatehouse and a shell wall; the
buildings almost entirely encase the original motte in stone.[77] The older
parts of the castle are constructed from crudely laid red sandstone rubble and
grey limestone, the 19th-century additions in more precisely cut red Pennant
sandstone.[33][78] A ditch is cut out of the rock in front of the Gatehouse
and leads to an eastern approach road.[79] The castle is surrounded by
woodland and the 19th-century vineyards below it have been converted into a
golf course.[46] In 1850, George Clark recorded an "outer court" of which
nothing remains; this may, in fact, have been the traces of the earlier lime
kiln operations around the site.[80]

The Gatehouse is reached across a wooden bridge, incorporating a
drawbridge.[81] Burges intended the bridge to copy those of medieval castles,
which he believed were designed to be easily set on fire in the event of
attack.[81] The Gatehouse was fitted with a wooden defensive bretèche[f] and,
above the entrance, Burges sited a portcullis and a glazed statue of the
Madonna and Child sculpted by Ceccardo Fucigna.[43][81]

The Keep is 12 metres (39 ft) in diameter with a square, spurred base; in the
13th century there would have been an adjacent turret, on the south-west side,
containing latrines, but few traces remain.[82] There is no evidence that the
tower that Burges termed a keep would have fulfilled this function in the
medieval period and he appears to have chosen the name because of his initial
decision to locate the bedrooms of Lord and Lady Bute in the rebuilt
tower.[82] The Kitchen Tower is also 12 metres (39 ft) across and rests on a
square, spurred base.[83] It was originally two storeys high and contained the
medieval kitchen; Burgess raised its height and gave it a conical roof and
chimneys.[83] The walls of these two towers are around 3.0 metres (10 ft)
thick at the base, thinning to 0.61 metres (2 ft) at the top.[81] The Well
Tower at 11.5 metres (38 ft) in diameter is slightly narrower than the Keep or
Kitchen Tower, with a well in its lowest chamber sunk into the ground.[84] The
Well Tower lacks the spurs of the other two towers and has a flat rather than
curved back, facing onto the courtyard, similar to some of the towers built at
Caerphilly by the de Clares.[85]

The towers contribute to what the architectural writer Charles Handley-Read
considered the castle's "sculptural and dramatic exterior".[86] Almost equal
in diameter, but of differing conical roof designs and heights, and topped
with copper-gilt weather vanes, they combine to produce a romantic
appearance,[3][79][87] which Matthew Williams described as bringing "a
Wagnerian flavor to the Taff Valley".[88]

—Burges defending his decision to feature conical roofs in the light of
doubtful historical evidence.[89]

The design of the towers was influenced by the work of the contemporary French
architect Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, including his restorations of Carcassone and
the châteaus of Aigle and Chillon.[31] While the exterior of Castell Coch is
relatively true to English 13th-century medieval design—albeit heavily
influenced by the Gothic Revival movement—the inclusion of the conical roofs,
which more closely resemble those of fortifications in France or Switzerland
than Britain, is historically inaccurate.[31][76][89][90] Although he mounted
a historical defence (see box), Burges chose the roofs mainly for
architectural effect, arguing that they appeared "more picturesque", and to
provide additional room for accommodation in the castle.[89]

The three towers lead into a small oval courtyard that sits on the top of the
motte, about 19.5 metres (64 ft) across lengthways.[83] Cantilevered galleries
and wall-walks run around the inside of the courtyard with neat and orderly
woodwork; the historian Peter Floud critiqued it as "perhaps too much like the
backcloth for an historical pageant".[87][91] Burges reconstructed the shell
wall that runs along the north-west side of the courtyard 0.99 metres (3 ft 3
in) thick, complete with arrow holes and a battlement.[58]

The Keep, the Well Tower and the Kitchen Tower incorporate a series of
apartments, of which the main sequence, the Castellan's Rooms, lies within the
Keep. The Hall, the Drawing Room, Lord Bute's Bedroom and Lady Bute's Bedroom
form a suite of rooms that exemplify the High Victorian Gothic style of 19th
century Britain. Unlike the exterior of the castle, which deliberately
imitated the architecture of the 13th century, the interior was purely High
Victorian in style.[37] On Burges's decoration of Cardiff Castle and Castell
Coch, Handley-Read wrote: "I have yet to see any High Victorian interiors from
the hand, very largely, of one designer, to equal either in homogeneity or
completeness, in quality of execution or originality of conception the best of
the interiors of the Welsh castles. For sheer power of intoxication, Burges
stand[s] unrivalled."[92]

The Banqueting Hall is 6.1 by 9.1 metres (20 by 30 ft) across with an 11-metre
(35 ft) ceiling, and occupies the whole of the first floor of the Hall
Block.[93] Burges persuaded Bute and the antiquarian George Clark that the
medieval hall would have stood on the first floor.[40] His original plan saw
access via one of two equally circuitous routes through the Well Tower or
around the entire internal gallery to enter the hall through a passage next to
the Drawing Room.[40] Neither approach was acceptable to Bute and at a late
stage, around 1878/9, the present entrance was created by expanding a window
at the head of the internal gallery.[40]

The hall is austere; the architectural historian John Newman critiqued its
decoration as "dilute" and "unfocused", Crook as "anaemic".[94][95] It
features stencilled ceilings and murals which resemble medieval manuscripts.
The murals were designed by Horatio Lonsdale and executed by Campbell, Smith &
Company.[96][95] The furniture is by John Chapple, made in Lord Bute's
workshops at Cardiff.[95] The tapered chimney of the room, modelled on 15th-
century French equivalents, contains a statue carved by Thomas Nicholls.[96]
Although the architectural historian Mark Girouard suggested that the statue
depicts the Hebrew King David, most historians believe that it shows Lucius of
Britain, according to legend the founder of the diocese of Llandaff in nearby
Cardiff.[87][93][96]

The octagonal Drawing Room occupies the first and second floors of the
Keep.[55] The ceiling is supported by vaulted stone ribs modelled on Viollet-
Le-Duc's work at Château de Coucy and the lower and upper halves of the room
are divided by a minstrels' gallery.[97][98] The original plans for the space
involved two chambers, one on each floor, and the new design was adopted only
in 1879, Burges noting at the time that he intended to "indulge in a little
more ornament" than elsewhere in the castle.[99][100]

The decoration of the room focuses on what Newman described as the
"intertwined themes [of] the fecundity of nature and the fragility of
life".[55][101] A fireplace by Thomas Nicholls features the Three Fates, the
trio of Greek goddesses who are depicted spinning, measuring and cutting the
thread of life.[87][102] The ceiling's vaulting is carved with butterflies,
reaching up to a golden sunburst at the apex of the room, while plumed birds
fly up into a starry sky in the intervening sections.[97][103] Around the
room, 58 panels, each depicting one or more unique plants, are surmounted by a
mural showing animals from twenty-four of _Aesop's Fables._ The plants are
wild flowers from the Mediterranean, where Lord Bute spent his winter months
each year. Carved birds, lizards and other wildlife decorate the
doorways.[103]

The historian Terry Measham wrote that the Drawing Room and Lady Bute's
Bedroom, "so powerful in their effect, are the two most important interiors in
the castle."[104] The architectural writer Andrew Lilwall-Smith considered the
Drawing Room to be "Burges's pièce de résistance", encapsulating his "romantic
vision of the Middle Ages".[87] The decoration of the ceiling, which was
carried out while Burges was alive, differs in tone from the treatment of the
murals, and the decoration of Lady Bute's Bedroom, which were both completed,
under the direction of William Frame and Horatio Lonsdale respectively, after
Burges's death.[102][105] Burges's work is distinctively High Gothic in style,
while the later efforts are more influenced by the softer colours and
character of the Aesthetic movement, which had grown in popularity by the
1880s.[52][102]

In comparison to other rooms within the castle, Lord Bute's Bedroom, sited
above the Winch Room, is relatively small and simple.[106] The original plan
had Bute's personal accommodation in the Keep but the expansion of the Drawing
Room to a double-height room in 1879 required a late change of plan.[98] The
bedroom contains an ornately carved fireplace.[107] Doors lead off the room to
an internal balcony overlooking the courtyard and to the bretache over the
gate arch.[106] The furniture is mainly by Chapple and post-dates Burges,
although the washstand and dressing table are pared-down versions of two
pieces – the Narcissus Washstand and the Crocker Dressing Table – that Burges
made for his own home in London, The Tower House.[108]

This bedroom is also less richly ornamented than many in the castle, making
extensive use of plain, stencilled geometrical patterns on the walls.[109]
Crook suggested this provided some "spartan" relief before the culmination of
the castle in Lady Bute's Bedroom but Floud considered the result "thin" and
drab in comparison with the more richly decorated chambers.[109][110] The
bedroom would have been impractical for regular use, lacking wardrobes and
other storage.[111]

Lady Bute's Bedroom comprises the upper two floors of the Keep, with a
coffered, double-dome ceiling that rises up into the tower's conical
roof.[112] The room was completed after Burges's death and, although he had
created an outline model for the room's structure, which survives, he did not
undertake detailed plans for its decoration.[105][110][112][c] His team
attempted to fulfil his vision for the room—"would Mr Burges have done it?"
William Frame asked Nicholls in a letter of 1887—but the interior decoration
was the work of Lonsdale between 1887 and 1888, with considerable involvement
from Bute and his wife.[105][110]

The room is circular, with the window embrasures forming a sequence of arches
around the outside.[110] It is richly decorated, with love as the theme,
displaying carved monkeys, pomegranates and grapevines on the ceiling, and
nesting birds topping the pillars.[110][112] Lord Bute thought the monkeys
inappropriately "lascivious".[110] Above the fireplace is a winged statue of
Psyche, the Greek goddess of the soul, carrying a heart-shaped shield which
displays the arms of the Bute family.[87] The washbasin, designed by John
Chapple, has a dragon tap, and cisterns for hot and cold water covered with
crenellated towers.[110] The Marchioness's scarlet and gold bed is the most
notable piece of furniture in the room, modelled on a medieval original drawn
by Viollet-le-Duc.[114][110] Crook described the bed as being "medieval to the
point of acute discomfort".[110]

The bedroom is Moorish in style, a popular inspiration in mid-Victorian
interior design, and echoes earlier work by Burges in the Arab Room at Cardiff
Castle and in the chancel at St Mary's Church at Studley Royal in
Yorkshire.[112][114] Lilwall-Smith likened the chamber, with its "Moorish-
looking dome, maroon-and-gold painted furniture and large, low bed decorated
with glass crystal orbs", to a scene from the _Arabian Nights_.[87] Peter
Floud criticised the eclectic nature of this Moorish theme and contrasted it
unfavourably with the more consistent style Burges applied to the Arab Room,
suggesting that it gave the bedroom an overly theatrical, even pantomime-like,
character.[115] The historian Matthew Williams considered that Lonsdale's
efforts lack the imagination and flair that Burges himself might have brought
to the room.[52]

The Windlass Room, or Winch Room, is in the Gatehouse, entered from the
Drawing Room.[103] It contains a working mechanism for operating the
drawbridge and the portcullis.[116] The equipment was originally intended for
the second floor, which Burges considered the most historically authentic
location.[117] When later design modifications led him to move Lord Bute's
Bedroom into that space, the equipment was simplified and placed on the first
floor.[117] The Windlass Room includes murder holes, which Burges thought
would have enabled medieval inhabitants of the castle to pour boiling water
and oil on attackers.[109][116]

An oratory, originally fitted to the roof of the Well Tower but removed before
1891, was decorated with twenty stained glass windows.[57][118] Ten of these
windows are displayed at Cardiff Castle, while the other ten are displayed on
site; two missing windows having been returned to the castle in 2011.[72]
Other rooms in the castle include Lady Margaret Bute's Bedroom, the servants'
hall and the kitchen.[119]

One of the tiled windows embrasures

A woodland scene in Lord Bute's Bedroom

Murals in the Drawing Room depicting Aesop's Fables ...

the room's vaulted ceiling ...

... and the Three Fates.

Nesting birds in Lady Bute's Bedroom ...

...the coffered ceiling ...

... and the crystal detailing of her bed

The woods surrounding the castle, known as the Taff Gorge complex, are among
the most westerly natural beech woodlands in the British Isles.[120] They
contain dog's mercury, ransoms, sanicles, bird's-nest orchid, greater
butterfly-orchid and yellow bird's nest plants.[120] The area has unusual rock
outcrops, which show the point where Devonian Old Red Sandstone and
Carboniferous Limestone beds meet; the Castell Coch Quarry is in the
vicinity.[121] To the southeast of the castle, a nine-hole golf course
occupies the site of the former vineyard.[122] The area is protected as the
Castell Coch Woodlands and Road Section Site of Special Scientific
Interest.[123]

