Coordinates: 38°55′59″N 76°59′52″W﻿ / ﻿38.9329387°N 76.9977828°W﻿ /
38.9329387; -76.9977828

**Catholic University of America** ( **CUA** ) is a private Catholic
university in Washington, D.C.. It is a pontifical university of the Catholic
Church in the United States and the only institution of higher education
founded by the U.S. Catholic bishops.[8] Established in 1887 as a graduate and
research center following approval by Pope Leo XIII on Easter Sunday,[9] the
university began offering undergraduate education in 1904. The university's
campus lies within the Brookland neighborhood, known as "Little Rome", which
contains 60 Catholic institutions, including Trinity Washington University and
the Dominican House of Studies, as well as the Basilica of the National Shrine
of the Immaculate Conception.

It has been ranked as one of the nation's best colleges by the _Princeton
Review,_[10] one of the best values of any private school in the country by
_Kiplinger's,_[11] "one of the most eco-friendly universities in the
country",[12] and was awarded the "highest federal recognition an institution
can receive" for community service.[13] In addition, it was ranked in the top
10 of the best Catholic colleges in the country,[14] and has been recommended
by the Cardinal Newman Society in _The Newman Guide to Choosing a Catholic
College._[10] It was described as one of the 25 most underrated colleges in
the United States.[15][16]

CUA's programs emphasize the liberal arts, professional education, and
personal development. The school stays closely connected with the Catholic
Church and Catholic organizations. The American Cardinals Dinner is put on by
the residential U.S. cardinals each year to raise scholarship funds for CUA.
The university has a long history of working with the Knights of Columbus; the
university's law school and basilica have dedications to the involvement and
support of the Knights.

At the Second Plenary Council of Baltimore in 1866, the United States
Conference of Catholic Bishops first discussed the need for a national
Catholic university. At the Third Plenary Council on January 26, 1885, bishops
chose the name _The Catholic University of America_ for the institution.[17]

In 1882, Bishop John Lancaster Spalding went to Rome to obtain Pope Leo XIII's
support for the university, also persuading his family friend Mary Gwendoline
Caldwell to pledge $300,000 to establish it. On April 10, 1887, Pope Leo XIII
sent James Cardinal Gibbons a letter granting permission to establish the
university.[17] On March 7, 1889, the Pope issued the encyclical _Magni Nobis_
,[18] granting the university its charter and establishing its mission as the
instruction of Catholicism and human nature together at the graduate level. By
developing new leaders and new knowledge, the university was intended to
strengthen and enrich Catholicism in the United States.[19]

The founders wanted to emphasize the church's special role in United States.
They believed that scientific and humanistic research, informed by faith,
would strengthen the church. They wanted to develop a national institution
that would promote the faith in a context of religious freedom, spiritual
pluralism, and intellectual rigor. The university was incorporated in 1887 on
66 acres (27 ha) of land next to the Old Soldiers Home.[17] President Grover
Cleveland was in attendance for the laying of the cornerstone of Divinity
Hall, now known as Caldwell Hall, on May 24, 1888, as were members of Congress
and the U.S. Cabinet.

When the university first opened on November 13, 1889, the curriculum
consisted of lectures in mental and moral philosophy, English literature, the
sacred scriptures, and the various branches of theology. At the end of the
second term, lectures on canon law were added. The first students were
graduated in 1889.[17]

In 1876 with the opening of the Johns Hopkins University, American
universities began dedicating themselves to graduate study and research in the
Prussian model.[17] CUA was the "principal channel through which the modern
university movement entered the American Catholic community." In 1900 it was
one of the 14 colleges that offered doctorate programs who formed the
Association of American Universities.[17]

In 1904, the university added an undergraduate program, establishing a
reputation for excellence. The president of the first undergraduate class was
Frank Kuntz, whose memoir of that period was published by the Catholic
University of America Press. The university gives an annual award named for
Kuntz.[20]

Bishop and Rector Thomas J. Shahan gave a speech to the Ancient Order of
Hibernians in 1894 in which he advocated for Irish independence in language,
culture, and politics. This resulted in the Hibernians endowing a chair in
chair of Gaelic Languages and Literature at the university.[21] Only Harvard
University had a similar position at the time, and this attracted the
attention of William Butler Yeats.[21] During a trip to the United States,
Yeats spoke to students in McMahon Hall on February 21, 1904.[21] In a follow-
up letter to Shahan, he said "you have surely a great university and I wish we
had its like in Ireland."[21]

Despite Washington being a Southern and segregated city when the university
was founded, it admitted black Catholic men as students.[22] At the time, the
only other college in the District to do so was Howard University, founded for
African-American education after the Civil War.[22] In 1895 Catholic
University had three black students, all from DC. "They were simply tested as
to their previous education, and this being found satisfactory, no notice
whatever was taken of their color. They stand on exactly the same footing as
other students of equal intellectual calibre and acquirements", according to
Keane.[22] Conaty, speaking to President William McKinley during a visit on
June 1, 1900, said that the university, "like the Catholic Church ... knows no
race line and no color line."[22]

President Theodore Roosevelt was out on a morning horseback ride one Sunday
morning when he came upon a group of students singing after Mass outside
Caldwell Chapel. He had heard of the statue of Pope Leo XIII in McMahon Hall
from his friend Maurice Francis Egan, an English professor, and asked to see
it.[23]

A victory parade for the 1936 Orange Bowl Champions went up Pennsylvania
Avenue on its circular route from Union Station to campus. President Franklin
D. Roosevelt, "on his way to church, became an unwitting parader, when the
march de triumph jammed traffic in front of the White House."[24][25] In 1938,
CBS and NBC broadcast an event live from the university campus where a number
of prominent Catholic scholars spoke out against Kristallnacht.[26]

In 1954, Columbus University merged with the law program of CUA to become the
Columbus School of Law at the Catholic University of America,[27] after the
American Bar Association in 1951 challenged law schools not affiliated with a
university. The CUA law school was the first professional school of the
university.

The presence of CUA attracted other Catholic institutions to the area,
including colleges, religious orders, and national service organizations.
Between 1900 and 1940, more than 50 international Catholic institutions rented
or owned property in neighboring Brookland. During the post-World War II
years, Catholic University had a dramatic expansion in enrollment, thanks to
veterans making use of the G.I. Bill to complete college educations. By the
early 21st century, the university has over 6,000 students from all 50 states
and around the world.

In 2018 the university experienced some challenges as administrators worked to
reduce a $3.5 million deficit. Some faculty objected to the draft plan and
voted "no confidence" in the president and provost.[28]

The Knights of Columbus and The Catholic University of America have a history
of "a close and supportive relationship" that dates almost to the founding of
the university.[27][29]

In 1899 the National Council of the K of C established a Knights of Columbus
Chair of American History at the university, to counter the somewhat anti-
Catholic bias of history-writing at the time.[27] More than 10,000 Knights
were on hand on April 13, 1904 to present a $55,633.79 check[30]
($1,399,831.80 in 2012 dollars[31]) to endow the Chair.[27]

In December 1904 Cardinal Gibbons appealed to the Knights for more financial
aid to help meet operating costs after some investments went sour. The Order
gave nearly $25,000.[30] By 1907 the financial situation of Catholic
University had improved but was still shaky. Every Knight was asked to
contribute $1 a year for a five-year period, and in December 1913, a $500,000
endowment was established.[27][30]

In 1920 the order contributed $60,000 toward the Catholic University gymnasium
and drill hall, which later was adapted for use as the Crough Building housing
the School of Architecture. In 2006, the Knights announced an $8,000,000 gift
to the university to renovate Keane Hall and rename it as McGivney Hall, after
the Knights' founder, Michael J. McGivney.[27][32] The building, which was
vacant, now houses the Washington session of the Pontifical John Paul II
Institute for Studies on Marriage and Family, which was funded by the Knights
and established at the Dominican House of Studies adjacent to the CUA campus
in 1988.[30][33]

A $1,000,000 trust was established in August 1965 to fund the Pro Deo and Pro
Patria Scholarship, providing twelve undergraduate scholarships annually to
the university.[34] In 1989 the Knights voted a $2,000,000 birthday gift to
the U.S. bishops on their bicentennial, to be given to Catholic University and
used to fund special projects jointly chosen by the university and the
Knights.[27][30] Part of it was used to build the Columbus School of Law.[30]

CUA is the only American university to have been visited by three popes and is
one of only two universities to have any visits by a pontiff.[17] Pope John
Paul II visited on October 7, 1979.[35] On April 16, 2008, Pope Benedict XVI
gave an address at the campus about Catholic education and academic
freedom.[36][37] Pope Francis visited on September 23, 2015 during his trip to
the United States, where he celebrated Mass on the east portico of the
Basilica of the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception.[38]

The CUA campus is in the residential community of Brookland in Northeast
Washington; its main entrance is 620 Michigan Ave., NE. The campus is bound by
Michigan Avenue to the south, North Capitol Street to the west, Hawaii Avenue
to the north, and John McCormick Road to the east. It is three miles (5 km)
north of the Capitol building.

The tree-lined campus is 193 acres (78 ha). Romanesque and modern design
dominate among the university's 48 major buildings. Between McMahon and
Gibbons halls and alongside the Basilica of the National Shrine of the
Immaculate Conception runs The Mall, a large strip of grass that is often the
site of Ultimate Frisbee games and sunbathers. Conte Circle is in the middle
of Centennial Village, a cluster of eight residential houses.

The Edward J. Pryzbyla University Center was opened in the spring of 2003,
bringing student dining services, the campus bookstore, student organization
offices, an 800-person ballroom, a convenience store, and more student
services under one roof.[39] The John K. Mullen Library completed a $6,000,000
renovation in 2004.[40][ _citation needed_ ]

The Columbus School of Law is on the main campus and has its own building with
moot courtrooms, a library, chapel, classrooms, and offices. Theological
College, the United States' national Roman Catholic seminary, is affiliated
with Catholic University.[41]

In April 2004, the university purchased 49 acres (20 ha) of land from the
Armed Forces Retirement Home. The parcel is the largest plot of open space in
the District and makes CUA the largest university in D.C. by land area. There
are currently no plans for the parcel other than to secure the property for
future growth.

In 2007, the university unveiled plans to expand the campus by adding three
new dormitories to the north side of campus.[42][43] The first of these, the
seven-story Opus Hall, was completed in 2009 in the university's traditional
Collegiate Gothic style. It houses 420 upper-class students and is the first
LEED Certified dormitory in Washington DC. Opus Hall is the first residential
community to house both male and female students since the 2007 adoption of a
single-sex dormitory policy.[44]

The university had previously demolished Conaty and Spellman dormitories,
which allowed for development of Monroe Street by Bozzuto contracting. In
Partnership with the university, "Monroe Street Market" and the "Brookland
Arts Walk" opened in 2014. A New CUA Barnes & Noble Bookstore opened on
Monroe. New apartments in the development allow older students the opportunity
to reside at an off-campus location within walking distance of the university.

The campus is served by the Brookland-CUA station on the Red Line of the
Washington Metro. Union Station, Capitol Hill, and the Smithsonian museums are
only a few minutes' ride away. Near the campus are the offices of the United
States Conference of Catholic Bishops and the Franciscan Monastery of the Holy
Land in America.

In 2015 the Catholic University of America began a partnership with the
Australian Catholic University to effectively own and operate a second campus
in Rome, Italy.

CUA has environmental sustainability programs, including participation in
Earth Day, Casey Trees tree planting, and Campus Beautification Day. CUA
constructed its most recent building, Opus Hall, as LEED-compliant, and
purchases 30% of its electricity from green sources.[45] The university is
participating in the 2010 College Sustainability Report Card
rating.[45][46][47]

In 2009, the School of Architecture and Planning introduced a Master of
Science in Sustainable Design program.[45]

Catholic University has 12 schools:[55][56]

in addition to 21 research centers and facilities.

In Fall 2013, the School of Library and Information Science became a
department of the School of Arts and Sciences, giving the university its
present composition.

The 12 schools offer Doctor of Philosophy degrees (or appropriate professional
degrees) in 66 programs and Master's Degrees in 103 programs.[2] Undergraduate
degrees are awarded in 72 programs by six schools: architecture and planning,
arts and sciences, engineering, music, nursing, and philosophy.[2]

Undergraduates combine a liberal arts curriculum in arts and sciences with
courses in a major field of study. The Metropolitan School provides programs
for adults who wish to earn baccalaureate degrees or participate in continuing
education and certificate programs on a part-time basis. 88% of undergraduates
and 61% of graduate students are Catholic.[57]

Catholic University is the only U.S. university with an ecclesiastical faculty
of canon law (established by the Holy See in 1923)[58] and is one of the few
U.S. universities with ecclesiastical faculties of philosophy and sacred
theology. Theological College, the university seminary, prepares men for the
priesthood. The School of Theology and Religious Studies is a member of the
Washington Theological Consortium.[59]

Ninety-eight percent of full-time faculty have doctoral or terminal degrees
and 68% teach undergraduates.[2] Of the full-time faculty, 59% are Catholic.
In 2018, every tenured and tenure track professor of biology received funding
from the National Institutes of Health, which is "quite rare in any
university."[60]

CUA was one of the fourteen founding members of the Association of American
Universities, although it withdrew its membership in 2002, citing a conflict
with its mission.[61]

Over time, several national Catholic scholarly associations became based at
the university, including the Catholic Biblical Association of America,
publisher of the _Catholic Biblical Quarterly_ , and (for many years) the
American Catholic Philosophical Association. The university is also home to
the Catholic University of America Press.

Research institutes located here include:

In addition, the university offers facilities at John K. Mullen of Denver
Memorial Library, the American Catholic History Research Center and University
Archives, as well as separate libraries on the campus for Architecture and
Planning, Biology, Music, Nursing, and Physics.[62] A special autonomous
library, the Oliveira Lima Library (sometimes referred to as the Ibero
American Library) houses one of the largest collections, outside of Brazil, of
rare books on history and literature of Portuguese Brazilian culture.[63]

Although the university continues to be under censure by the American
Association of University Professors for academic freedom violations and
continues to ban certain speakers from campus, CUA has made a general
statement of policy that the academic freedom of its faculty and students will
be respected.[64] It considers academic freedom a "fundamental condition for
research and dissemination of information."[64] The policy sets forth its
respect for the right and responsibility of its faculty and students to (i)
conduct research, (ii) publish their findings, and (iii) discuss ideas
according to the principles, sources and methods of their academic
disciplines.[64] The university further "sanctions" the investigation of
"unexplored phenomena, advancement of knowledge, and critical examination of
ideas, old and new" and "accepts the responsibility of protecting both teacher
and student from being forced to deny truth that has been discovered or to
assert claims that have not been established in the discipline."[64]

The university specifically provides that "theologians" in the university are
"expected to give assent to the teachings of the magisterium in keeping with
the various degrees of assent that are called for by authoritative
teaching."[64] The Catholic University of America does not offer general
studies in theology. Instead it offers doctorates in historical theology and
systematic theology, the latter of which "undertakes the task of a
comprehensive and synthetic understanding of the Christian faith as mediated
through the Scriptures and the Catholic Tradition and as interpreted by the
conciliar and papal magisterium."[65] In addition, it offers ecclesiastical
degrees (i.e., licenses to teach Catholic Theology) in Liturgical Studies and
Sacramental Theology, Moral Theology/Ethics, and Historical and Systematic
Theology.[66] In order to teach theology at The Catholic University of
America, one must be licensed to teach Catholic Theology by the Vatican.

In 1967, tenured professor of theology Reverend Charles E. Curran was fired
for his views on birth control, but was reinstated after a five-day faculty-
led strike.[67] In 1986, the Vatican declared that Curran could no longer
teach theology at Catholic University because "clashes with church authorities
finally culminated in a decision by the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine
of the Faith, headed by then-Cardinal (and future Pope) Josef Ratzinger, that
Curran was neither suitable nor eligible to be a professor of Catholic
theology."[68] The areas of dispute included publishing articles that debated
theological and ethical views regarding divorce, artificial contraception,
masturbation, pre-marital intercourse, and homosexual acts.[69] As noted in
the American Association of University Professors report, "Had it not been for
the intervention of the Sacred Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith,
Professor Curran would undoubtedly still be active in the university's
Department of Theology, a popular teacher, honored theologian, and respected
colleague."[69] Curran's attorneys argued that CUA did not follow proper
procedures or its own policy statements in handling the case. In response, CUA
claimed that the Vatican's actions against Curran trumped any campus-based
policy or tenure rules. In 1989, he filed suit against Catholic University,
and the court determined that the university had the right to fire him for
teaching views in contradiction to the school's religion.[70]

In 1990, the American Association of University Professors (AAUP) defended
Curran and censured Catholic University due to its failure to adhere to the
AAUP's Principles on Academic Freedom and Tenure, and that it found that
"unsatisfactory conditions of academic freedom and tenure have been found to
prevail" at The Catholic University of America. As of August 2019[update], the
Catholic University remains on the list of censured institutions.[71] The two
conditions for having the censure removed are inviting Curran, whose license
to teach Catholic Theology had been suspended by the Vatican, back to campus
and changing the university's "Statement on Academic Freedom."[72] President
David M. O'Connell refused to do either stating, "Every American university
has a right to govern itself according to its own identity, mission,
standards, and procedures."[72]

The university as a policy does not allow outside guests to speak on campus to
any audience if they have previously expressed an opinion on abortion or other
serious issues conflicting with the Catholic Church's teaching. Applying this
policy in 2004, CUA was criticized for rescinding Stanley Tucci's invitation
for a seminar about Italian cinema, because he had lent past support for
Planned Parenthood.[73]

In a letter to the campus that next month, university President David
O'Connell wrote:

I consider any pro-choice advocacy—whether deliberate or accidental, whether
presented under the guise of academic freedom or right to free speech—as
incompatible with that fidelity and not worthy of The Catholic University of
America.[74]

The next year, in 2005, the school was criticized for initially rejecting an
application for recognition of a student chapter of the NAACP; one of the
reasons officials cited in its rejection was the national organization's pro-
choice stance.[75] In 2006 the CUA administration barred a student-run on-
campus performance of Eve Ensler's _The Vagina Monologues_.

In 2009, the school made its speaker policy more stringent, prohibiting all
candidates for political office from speaking on campus. Representatives of
both Democratic and Republican clubs on campus have criticized the
decision.[76]

The student population in 2017 is 6,521. The SAT scores for students are "very
competitive", and there is a high 6 year graduation rate.[77] While tuition is
expensive, 93% of freshmen receive grants. There are slightly more female
students at 53%, and a 7:1 faculty to student ratio. Most classes have between
10-19 students.

There are over 100 registered student clubs and organizations at CUA for a
wide variety of interests including athletics, academics, social, Greek life,
service, political and religious.

Annual events include week-long Homecoming celebrations, the Mr. CUA
competition, and a number of dances including the Beaux Arts Ball, the
Mistletoe Ball, and the Athletes Ball. In addition to the radio station WCUA,
other campus media outlets include _The Crosier_ , a scholarly publication
concerning Catholic social teaching, _The Tower_ , the campus' independent
weekly newspaper, and _CRUX_ , a literary magazine.

Although the Catholic University states that it does not have any Greek life
on campus, it in fact has three Greek social organizations and one Greek
service organization. Catholic University Greek life includes Alpha Delta
Gamma the national Catholic social fraternity–Kappa chapter and Kappa Tau
Gamma the local Christian social-service sorority. Although not officially
recognized by the University, the Sigma-Psi chapter of the Kappa Sigma
fraternity received an official charter in 2014. The members are all students
of the University and are active on and around the campus. The national
service fraternity, Alpha Phi Omega, has a chapter (Zeta Mu) on campus as
well. Former Phi Kappa Theta DC Omega chapter is inactive.

The CUA Student Association is the university's undergraduate student
government. It includes the General Assembly, an advocacy body, and the
Student Fee Allocation Board which serves as the steward of the Student
Activity and Club Sports Fee. The graduate student government is a separate
entity and was not affected by the changes during the 2006-2007 academic year.

The university's Program Board, which puts on many of the concerts on campus
as well as the annual Mistletoe Ball, provides other activities for the entire
CUA community. Previous events include ski trips, advance screenings of
movies, Noise In The Pryz, and the Movies on the Mall.

The Crosier, a student-run journal of pro-life academic articles, was named
"Best Journal of Letters" by the Intercollegiate Studies Institute in
2014.[79]

The music and drama programs, as part of a class, stage productions each
semester, performances ranging from Broadway productions to plays and operas.
Catholic University students also participate in a Symphony orchestra and
choral groups, including a cappella groups Take Note and RedLine.[80]

There have been a number of songs associated with the university over the
years.[81] The most recent fight song, written by Steve Schatz, was adopted in
2002. The original fight song, "The Flying Cardinals", dates back to before
the 1930s.[82] There are two alma maters, considered to be the university's
official songs. The first, "Hail CUA" was set to music composed by Victor
Herbert and was adopted in 1920.[82] The other, Guardians of Truth by Fr.
Thomas McLean, actually came in 2nd place in the 1920 competition but was
widely adopted in the ensuing years.[82]

Albert Von Tilzer, composer of _Take Me Out to the Ball Game_ , wrote two
songs for the university, _We're Rooting For You_ and _CU Will Shine Tonight_.
The earliest sports song, _Through the Town_ , dates from 1916.[81] _Drink a
Highball_ was a popular song during Prohibition. In honor of the university's
125th anniversary, an hour-long nostalgic musical revue was performed.[83]

The DuFour Athletic Center has hosted The Alarm, The Fixx, Black 47, Gavin
DeGraw, Brandi Carlile, The Hooters, They Might Be Giants, Howie Day, and The
Ataris. Comedy acts include Ben Stein and Big Al Goodwin.

While the university welcomes students of all faiths, 84% of undergraduates
and 59% of graduate students self-identify as Catholic. The campus ministry
has two groups of _student_ ministers: the "resident ministers" who live in
residence halls and focus primarily on upperclassmen and the "house members",
who focus on freshmen.

The Friday Night Planning Committee works with the house members to plan
activities for Friday nights that are alcohol free. Campus ministry also
coordinates university liturgies, plans and runs retreats, provides faith
formation including R.C.I.A., and operates the online Prayernet.

In honor of the university's 125th anniversary, students, staff, faculty, and
alumni were challenged to complete 125,000 hours of community service between
May 15, 2011 and Founders Day, April 10, 2012. On Founders Day co-chairmen of
the 125th Anniversary Committee Randall Ott, dean of architecture and
planning, and Bart Pollock, web content editor, announced that a total of
352,627 hours were recorded, nearly tripling the original goal.[84]

The 125,000 hour mark was surpassed on January 24.[84] The total number of
student hours passed 125,000 hours in mid-March, and by the end of the month
125,000 hours had been served within Washington, D.C.[84] Three campus
organizations, the Bachelor of Arts Social Service Organization (1,090 hours),
the women's group, Gratia Plena (1,469 hours), and the men's fraternal
organization, Knights of Columbus (2,609 hours), were singled out for their
contributions.[85][86]

Students from the National Catholic School of Social Service performed the
greatest number of hours, at 108,641, while students from the School of Arts
and Sciences had the most students participate at 891.[86] The Class of 2011
led alumni with 7,489 hours, and all alumni contributed 60,828 hours.[86]

The Catholic University of America's intercollegiate sports teams are called
the _Cardinals_ and they compete in the NCAA's Division III. They are
primarily members of the Landmark Conference, and associate members of the New
England Women's and Men's Athletic Conference (football) and Mid-Atlantic
Rowing Conference (rowing). The team colors are red (PMS 1805) and black. The
first recorded football game was played against Mount Saint Mary's College on
November 28, 1895 but records indicate earlier track and field events.

The university beat the University of Mississippi at the second Orange Bowl in
1936, 20-19.[87] They also tied the Arizona State Teachers College at Tempe in
the 1940 Sun Bowl.

CUA sponsors 25 NCAA Division III sports teams. The school competes in men's
football and baseball; in women's softball and volleyball; and in men's and
women's cross country, soccer, basketball, swimming, field hockey, lacrosse,
tennis, indoor and outdoor track and field, golf and rowing.

Students field club teams in sports including cheerleading, ice hockey, rugby,
sailing and lacrosse.

There are many notable alumni of The Catholic University of America,
particularly in the arts, in the Church and in public service. Graduates
include cardinals, bishops, priests, and nuns. CUA's current total of alumni
exceeds 83,000, including 12 living cardinals.[88]

Members of the United States House of Representatives and Senate, ambassadors,
governors, state legislators, mayors, and judges have also attended CUA.
Additionally, many notable actors, playwrights, columnists, and social
activists are alumni in addition to film, theatrical and television producers.
Others include CEOs, scholars, and university presidents.

In 1942, Catholic University became the first university to award a doctorate
in geology to an African American, Marguerite Williams.[89][90]

The Catholic University of America announced on January 8, 2013 the creation
of a School of Business and Economics. Previously housed in the School of Arts
and Sciences as _Department of Business and Economics_ , the University's
Board of Trustees voted in December 2012 to confirm the creation of the school
commencing January 1, 2013 after a three-year process of discernment,
evaluation, and planning.[91][92]

CUA was founded by the nation's bishops, and they continue to have a presence
on the Board of Trustees. There are 48 elected members, and the bylaws
stipulate that 24 must be clerics, 18 of which must be members of the bishops
conference.[17] Of the 51 total trustees (including the university president),
24 are bishops (including eight cardinals). In addition, there are one
religious sister and two priests.

