**Cellulose** is an organic compound with the formula (C  
6H  
10O  
5)  
n, a polysaccharide consisting of a linear chain of several hundred to many
thousands of β(1→4) linked D-glucose units.[3][4] Cellulose is an important
structural component of the primary cell wall of green plants, many forms of
algae and the oomycetes. Some species of bacteria secrete it to form
biofilms.[5] Cellulose is the most abundant organic polymer on Earth.[6] The
cellulose content of cotton fiber is 90%, that of wood is 40–50%, and that of
dried hemp is approximately 57%.[7][8][9]

Cellulose is mainly used to produce paperboard and paper. Smaller quantities
are converted into a wide variety of derivative products such as cellophane
and rayon. Conversion of cellulose from energy crops into biofuels such as
cellulosic ethanol is under development as a renewable fuel source. Cellulose
for industrial use is mainly obtained from wood pulp and cotton.[6]

Some animals, particularly ruminants and termites, can digest cellulose with
the help of symbiotic micro-organisms that live in their guts, such as
_Trichonympha_. In human nutrition, cellulose is a non-digestible constituent
of insoluble dietary fiber, acting as a hydrophilic bulking agent for feces
and potentially aiding in defecation.

Cellulose was discovered in 1838 by the French chemist Anselme Payen, who
isolated it from plant matter and determined its chemical formula.[3][10][11]
Cellulose was used to produce the first successful thermoplastic polymer,
celluloid, by Hyatt Manufacturing Company in 1870. Production of rayon
("artificial silk") from cellulose began in the 1890s and cellophane was
invented in 1912. Hermann Staudinger determined the polymer structure of
cellulose in 1920. The compound was first chemically synthesized (without the
use of any biologically derived enzymes) in 1992, by Kobayashi and Shoda.[12]

Cellulose has no taste, is odorless, is hydrophilic with the contact angle of
20–30 degrees,[13] is insoluble in water and most organic solvents, is chiral
and is biodegradable. It was shown to melt at 467 °C in pulse tests made by
Dauenhauer _et al._ (2016).[14] It can be broken down chemically into its
glucose units by treating it with concentrated mineral acids at high
temperature.[15]

Cellulose is derived from D-glucose units, which condense through
β(1→4)-glycosidic bonds. This linkage motif contrasts with that for
α(1→4)-glycosidic bonds present in starch and glycogen. Cellulose is a
straight chain polymer. Unlike starch, no coiling or branching occurs and the
molecule adopts an extended and rather stiff rod-like conformation, aided by
the equatorial conformation of the glucose residues. The multiple hydroxyl
groups on the glucose from one chain form hydrogen bonds with oxygen atoms on
the same or on a neighbor chain, holding the chains firmly together side-by-
side and forming _microfibrils_ with high tensile strength. This confers
tensile strength in cell walls where cellulose microfibrils are meshed into a
polysaccharide _matrix_. The high tensile strength of plant stems and of the
tree wood also arises from the arrangement of cellulose fibers intimately
distributed into the lignin matrix. The mechanical role of cellulose fibers in
the wood matrix responsible for its strong structural resistance, can somewhat
be compared to that of the reinforcement bars in concrete, lignin playing here
the role of the hardened cement paste acting as the "glue" in between the
cellulose fibers.

Compared to starch, cellulose is also much more crystalline. Whereas starch
undergoes a crystalline to amorphous transition when heated beyond 60–70 °C in
water (as in cooking), cellulose requires a temperature of 320 °C and pressure
of 25 MPa to become amorphous in water.[16]

Several different crystalline structures of cellulose are known, corresponding
to the location of hydrogen bonds between and within strands. Natural
cellulose is cellulose I, with structures Iα and Iβ. Cellulose produced by
bacteria and algae is enriched in Iα while cellulose of higher plants consists
mainly of Iβ. Cellulose in regenerated cellulose fibers is cellulose II. The
conversion of cellulose I to cellulose II is irreversible, suggesting that
cellulose I is metastable and cellulose II is stable. With various chemical
treatments it is possible to produce the structures cellulose III and
cellulose IV.[17]

Many properties of cellulose depend on its chain length or degree of
polymerization, the number of glucose units that make up one polymer molecule.
Cellulose from wood pulp has typical chain lengths between 300 and 1700 units;
cotton and other plant fibers as well as bacterial cellulose have chain
lengths ranging from 800 to 10,000 units.[6] Molecules with very small chain
length resulting from the breakdown of cellulose are known as cellodextrins;
in contrast to long-chain cellulose, cellodextrins are typically soluble in
water and organic solvents.

Cellulose contains 44.44% carbon, 6.17% hydrogen, and 49.39% oxygen. The
chemical formula of cellulose is (C6H10O5)n where n is the degree of
polymerization and represents the number of glucose groups.[18]

Plant-derived cellulose is usually found in a mixture with hemicellulose,
lignin, pectin and other substances, while bacterial cellulose is quite pure,
has a much higher water content and higher tensile strength due to higher
chain lengths.[6]:3384

Cellulose is soluble in Schweizer's reagent, cupriethylenediamine (CED),
cadmiumethylenediamine (Cadoxen), _N_ -methylmorpholine _N_ -oxide, and
lithium chloride / dimethylacetamide.[19] This is used in the production of
regenerated celluloses (such as viscose and cellophane) from dissolving pulp.
Cellulose is also soluble in many kinds of ionic liquids.[20]

Cellulose consists of crystalline and amorphous regions. By treating it with
strong acid, the amorphous regions can be broken up, thereby producing
nanocrystalline cellulose, a novel material with many desirable
properties.[21] Recently, nanocrystalline cellulose was used as the filler
phase in bio-based polymer matrices to produce nanocomposites with superior
thermal and mechanical properties.[22]

Given a cellulose-containing material, the carbohydrate portion that does not
dissolve in a 17.5% solution of sodium hydroxide at 20 °C is _α cellulose_ ,
which is true cellulose.[ _clarification needed_ ] Acidification of the
extract precipitates _β cellulose_. The portion that dissolves in base but
does not precipitate with acid is _γ cellulose_.[ _citation needed_ ]

Cellulose can be assayed using a method described by Updegraff (1969),[4]
where the fiber is dissolved in acetic and nitric acid to remove lignin,
hemicellulose, and xylosans. The resulting cellulose is allowed to react with
anthrone in sulfuric acid. The resulting coloured compound is assayed
spectrophotometrically at a wavelength of approximately 635 nm.

In addition, cellulose can be represented by the difference between acid
detergent fiber (ADF) and acid detergent lignin (ADL).[ _citation needed_ ]

Luminescent conjugated oligothiophenes can also be used to detect cellulose
using fluorescence microscopy or spectrofluorometric methods.[23]

In plants cellulose is synthesized at the plasma membrane by rosette terminal
complexes (RTCs). The RTCs are hexameric protein structures, approximately 25
nm in diameter, that contain the cellulose synthase enzymes that synthesise
the individual cellulose chains.[24] Each RTC floats in the cell's plasma
membrane and "spins" a microfibril into the cell wall.

RTCs contain at least three different cellulose synthases, encoded by _CesA_ (
_Ces_ is short for "cellulose synthase") genes, in an unknown
stoichiometry.[25] Separate sets of _CesA_ genes are involved in primary and
secondary cell wall biosynthesis. There are known to be about seven
subfamilies in the plant _CesA_ superfamily, some of which include the more
cryptic, tentatively-named _Csl_ (cellulose synthase-like) enzymes. These
cellulose syntheses use UDP-glucose to form the β(1→4)-linked cellulose.[26]

Bacterial cellulose is produced using the same family of proteins, although
the gene is called _BcsA_ for "bacterial cellulose synthase" or _CelA_ for
"cellulose" in many instances.[27] In fact, plants acquired _CesA_ from the
endosymbiosis event that produced the chloroplast.[28] All cellulose synthases
known belongs to glucosyltransferase family 2 (GT2).[27]

Cellulose synthesis requires chain initiation and elongation, and the two
processes are separate. Cellulose synthase ( _CesA_ ) initiates cellulose
polymerization using a steroid primer, sitosterol-beta-glucoside, and UDP-
glucose. It then utilizes UDP-D-glucose precursors to elongate the growing
cellulose chain. A cellulase may function to cleave the primer from the mature
chain.[29]

Cellulose is also synthesised by tunicate animals, particularly in the tests
of ascidians (where the cellulose was historically termed "tunicine"
(tunicin)).[30]

Cellulolysis is the process of breaking down cellulose into smaller
polysaccharides called cellodextrins or completely into glucose units; this is
a hydrolysis reaction. Because cellulose molecules bind strongly to each
other, cellulolysis is relatively difficult compared to the breakdown of other
polysaccharides.[31] However, this process can be significantly intensified in
a proper solvent, e.g. in an ionic liquid.[32]

Most mammals have limited ability to digest dietary fiber such as cellulose.
Some ruminants like cows and sheep contain certain symbiotic anaerobic
bacteria (such as _Cellulomonas_ and _Ruminococcus_ spp.) in the flora of the
rumen, and these bacteria produce enzymes called cellulases that help the
microorganism to digest cellulose; the breakdown products are then used by the
bacteria for proliferation.[33] The bacterial mass is later digested by the
ruminant in its digestive system (stomach and small intestine). Horses use
cellulose in their diet by fermentation in their hindgut via symbiotic
bacteria which produce cellulase to digest cellulose.[ _citation needed_ ]
Similarly, some termites contain in their hindguts certain flagellate protozoa
producing such enzymes, whereas others contain bacteria or may produce
cellulase.[34]

The enzymes used to cleave the glycosidic linkage in cellulose are glycoside
hydrolases including endo-acting cellulases and exo-acting glucosidases. Such
enzymes are usually secreted as part of multienzyme complexes that may include
dockerins and carbohydrate-binding modules.[35]

At temperatures above 350 °C, cellulose undergoes thermolysis (also called
‘pyrolysis’), decomposing into solid char, vapors, aerosols, and gases such as
carbon dioxide.[36] Maximum yield of vapors which condense to a liquid called
_bio-oil_ is obtained at 500 °C.[37]

Semi-crystalline cellulose polymers react at pyrolysis temperatures (350–600
°C) in a few seconds; this transformation has been shown to occur via a solid-
to-liquid-to-vapor transition, with the liquid (called _intermediate liquid
cellulose_ or _molten cellulose_ ) existing for only a fraction of a
second.[38] Glycosidic bond cleavage produces short cellulose chains of two-
to-seven monomers comprising the melt. Vapor bubbling of intermediate liquid
cellulose produces aerosols, which consist of short chain anhydro-oligomers
derived from the melt.[39]

Continuing decomposition of molten cellulose produces volatile compounds
including levoglucosan, furans, pyrans, light oxygenates and gases via primary
reactions.[40] Within thick cellulose samples, volatile compounds such as
levoglucosan undergo ‘secondary reactions’ to volatile products including
pyrans and light oxygenates such as glycolaldehyde.[41]

Hemicelluloses are polysaccharides related to cellulose that comprise about
20% of the biomass of land plants. In contrast to cellulose, hemicelluloses
are derived from several sugars in addition to glucose, especially xylose but
also including mannose, galactose, rhamnose, and arabinose. Hemicelluloses
consist of shorter chains – between 500 and 3000 sugar units.[42] Furthermore,
hemicelluloses are branched, whereas cellulose is unbranched.

The hydroxyl groups (-OH) of cellulose can be partially or fully reacted with
various reagents to afford derivatives with useful properties like mainly
cellulose esters and cellulose ethers (-OR). In principle, though not always
in current industrial practice, cellulosic polymers are renewable resources.

Ester derivatives include:

The cellulose acetate and cellulose triacetate are film- and fiber-forming
materials that find a variety of uses. The nitrocellulose was initially used
as an explosive and was an early film forming material. With camphor,
nitrocellulose gives celluloid.

Ether derivatives include:

The sodium carboxymethyl cellulose can be cross-linked to give the
croscarmellose sodium (E468) for use as a disintegrant in pharmaceutical
formulations.

Cellulose for industrial use is mainly obtained from wood pulp and cotton.[6]
The kraft process is used to separate cellulose from lignin, another major
component of plant matter.

