**Chaim Topol** (Hebrew: חיים טופול‎, born September 9, 1935),[1] also spelled
**Haym Topol** ,[2] mononymously known as **Topol** ,[3] is an Israeli actor,
singer, comedian, voice artist, film producer, author, and illustrator. He is
best known for his portrayal of Tevye the Dairyman, the lead role in the
musical _Fiddler on the Roof_ , on both stage and screen, having performed
this role more than 3,500 times in shows and revivals from the late 1960s
through to 2009.[3]

Topol began his acting career during his Israeli army service in the Nahal
entertainment troupe, and later toured Israel with kibbutz theatre and
satirical theatre companies. He was a co-founder of the Haifa Theatre. His
breakthrough film role came in 1964 as the title character in _Sallah Shabati_
, by Israeli writer Ephraim Kishon, for which he won a Golden Globe for Most
Promising Newcomer—Male. Topol went on to appear in more than 30 films in
Israel and the United States, including _Galileo_ (1975), _Flash Gordon_
(1980) and _For Your Eyes Only_ (1981). He was described as Israel's only
internationally recognized entertainer from the 1960s through 1980s. He won a
Golden Globe for Best Actor and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best
Actor for his 1971 film portrayal of Tevye, and was nominated for a Tony Award
for Best Actor for a 1991 Broadway revival of _Fiddler on the Roof_.

He is a founder of Variety Israel, an organization serving children with
special needs, and Jordan River Village, a year-round camp for Arab and Jewish
children with life-threatening illnesses, for which he serves as chairman of
the board. In 2015 he was awarded the Israel Prize for lifetime achievement.

Topol was born on September 9, 1935 in Tel Aviv,[2] in what was then Mandatory
Palestine (now Israel). His father, Jacob Topol, had immigrated to Mandatory
Palestine from Russia in the early 1930s and worked as a plasterer;[4][5] he
also served in the Haganah paramilitary organization.[6] His mother, Rel (née
Goldman) Topol, was a seamstress.[4][7] Although the young Chaim wanted to
become a commercial artist, his elementary school teachers saw a theatrical
side to him, and encouraged him to act in school plays and read stories to the
class.[3]

At age 14 he began working as a printer at the _Davar_ newspaper while
pursuing his high school studies at night.[3] He graduated high school at age
17 and moved to Kibbutz Geva. A year later, he enlisted in the Israeli army
and became a member of the Nahal entertainment troupe, singing and acting in
traveling shows.[3][8] He rose in rank to troupe commander.[3]

Twenty-three days after being discharged from military service on October 2,
1956, and two days after marrying Galia Finkelstein, a fellow Nahal troupe
member, Topol was called up for reserve duty in the Sinai Campaign. He
performed for soldiers stationed in the desert. After the war, he and his wife
settled in Kibbutz Mishmar David, where Topol worked as a garage mechanic.[3]
Topol assembled a kibbutz theatre company made up of friends from his Nahal
troupe; the group toured four days a week, worked on their respective
kibbutzim for two days a week, and had one day off. The theatre company was in
existence from early 1957 to the mid-1960s. Topol both sang and acted with the
group, doing both "loudly".[3]

Between 1960 and 1964, Topol performed with the _Batzal Yarok_ ("Green Onion")
satirical theatre company, which also toured Israel.[3][9] Other members of
the group included Uri Zohar, Nechama Hendel, Zaharira Harifai, Arik Einstein,
and Oded Kotler.[10] In 1960, Topol co-founded the Haifa Municipal Theatre
with Yosef Milo, serving as assistant to the director and acting in plays by
Shakespeare, Ionesco, and Brecht.[3][11] In 1965 he performed in the Cameri
Theatre in Tel Aviv.[11]

–Tom Tugend on Topol's portrayal of _Sallah Shabati_[12]

Topol's first film appearance was in the 1961 film _I Like Mike_ , followed by
the 1963 Israeli film _El Dorado_.[3][10] His breakthrough role came as the
lead character in the 1964 film _Sallah Shabati_.[13] Adapted for the screen
by Ephraim Kishon from his original play, the social satire depicts the
hardships of a Mizrahi Jewish immigrant family in Israel in the 1950s,
satirizing "just about every pillar of Israeli society: the Ashkenazi
establishment, the pedantic bureaucracy, corrupt political parties, rigid
kibbutz ideologues and ... the Jewish National Fund's tree-planting
program".[12][14] Topol, who was 29 during the filming,[15] was familiar
playing the role of the family patriarch, having performed skits from the play
with his Nahal entertainment troupe during his army years.[3][10] He
contributed his own ideas for the part, playing the character as a more
universal Sephardi Jew instead of specifically a Yemenite, Iraqi, or Moroccan
Jew, and asking Kishon to change the character's first name from Saadia (a
recognizably Yemenite name) to Sallah (a more general Mizrahi name).[3]

The film won the Golden Globe Award for Best Foreign Language Film, and Topol
won the 1964 Golden Gate Award for Best Actor at the San Francisco
International Film Festival and the 1965 Golden Globe for Most Promising
Newcomer—Male.[3][9][10][16] _Sallah Shabati_ was nominated for the Academy
Award for Best Foreign Language Film, losing to the Italian-language
_Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow_.[3]

In 1966, Topol made his English-language film debut as Abou Ibn Kaqden in the
Mickey Marcus biopic _Cast a Giant Shadow_.[4][17]

Topol came to greatest prominence in his portrayal of Tevye the Dairyman on
stage and screen. He first played the lead role in the Israeli production of
the musical _Fiddler on the Roof_ in 1966,[10] replacing Shmuel Rodensky for
10 weeks when Rodensky fell ill.[3] Harold Prince, producer of the original
_Fiddler on the Roof_ that opened on Broadway in 1964, had seen Topol in
_Sallah Shabati_ and called him to audition for the role of the fifty-
something Tevye in a new production scheduled to open at Her Majesty's Theatre
in London on February 16, 1967.[18] Not yet fluent in English, Topol memorized
the score from the Broadway cast album and learned the lyrics with a British
native.[18] When Topol arrived at the audition, Prince was surprised that this
30-year-old man had played Shabati, a character in his sixties. Topol
explained, "A good actor can play an old man, a sad face, a happy man. Makeup
is not an obstacle".[3] Topol also surprised the producers with his
familiarity with the staging, since he had already acted in the Israeli
production, and was hired.[3][19] He spent six months in London learning his
part phonetically with vocal coach Cicely Berry.[19] Jerome Robbins, director
and choreographer of the 1964 Broadway show who came over to direct the London
production, "re-directed" the character of Tevye for Topol and helped the
actor deliver a less caricatured performance.[20][21] Topol's performance
received positive reviews.[21]

A few months after the opening, Topol was called up for reserve duty in the
Six-Day War and returned to Israel. He was assigned to an army entertainment
troupe on the Golan Heights.[21] Afterward he returned to the London
production, appearing in a total of 430 performances.[22]

It was during the London run that he began being known by his last name only,
as the English producers were unable to pronounce the voiceless uvular
fricative consonant Ḥet at the beginning of his first name, Chaim, instead
calling him "Shame".[3]

–Norman Jewison, 2011[23]

In casting the 1971 film version of _Fiddler on the Roof_ , director Norman
Jewison and his production team sought an actor other than Zero Mostel for the
lead role. This decision was a controversial one, as Mostel had made the role
famous in the long-running Broadway musical and wanted to star in the
film.[24] But Jewison and his team felt Mostel would eclipse the character
with his larger-than-life personality.[25][26][27] Jewison flew to London in
February 1968 to see Topol perform as Tevye during his last week with the
London production, and chose him over Danny Kaye, Herschel Bernardi, Rod
Steiger, Danny Thomas, Walter Matthau, Richard Burton, and Frank Sinatra, who
had also expressed interest in the part.[3][26][28]

Then 36 years old, Topol was made to look 20 years older and 30 pounds (14 kg)
heavier with makeup and costuming.[5] As in his role as Shabati, Topol used
the technique of "locking his muscles" to convincingly play an older
character.[3][29] He later explained:

As a young man, I had to make sure that I didn't break the illusion for the
audience. You have to tame yourself. I'm now someone who is supposed to be 50,
60 years old. I cannot jump. I cannot suddenly be young. You produce a certain
sound [in your voice] that is not young.[3]

For his performance, Topol won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a
Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy,[30] the Sant Jordi Award for Best
Performance in a Foreign Film,[31] and the 1972 David di Donatello for Best
Foreign Actor, sharing the latter with Elizabeth Taylor.[10] He was also
nominated for the 1971 Academy Award for Best Actor, losing to Gene Hackman in
_The French Connection_.[17][13]

In 1983 Topol reprised the role of Tevye in a revival of _Fiddler on the Roof_
in West End theatre.[22] In 1989, he played the role in a 30-city U.S. touring
production.[32] As he was by then the approximate age of the character, he
commented, "I didn't have to spend the energy playing the age".[32] In
1990–1991, he again starred as Tevye in a Broadway revival of _Fiddler_ at the
Gershwin Theatre.[32][33] In 1991, he was nominated for a Tony Award for Best
Performance by a Leading Actor in a Musical,[34] losing to Jonathan Pryce in
_Miss Saigon_. Topol again played Tevye in a 1994 London revival,[22] which
became a touring production. In that production, the role of one of his
daughters was played by his own daughter, Adi Topol Margalith.[3][35]

Topol reprised the role of Tevye for a 1997–1998 touring production in Israel,
as well as a 1998 show at the Regent Theatre in Melbourne.[36] In September
2005 he returned to Australia for a _Fiddler on the Roof_ revival at the
Capitol Theatre in Sydney,[37] followed by an April 2006 production at the
Lyric Theatre in Brisbane[38] and a June 2006 production at Her Majesty's
Theatre in Melbourne.[36] In May 2007, he starred in a production in the
Auckland Civic Theatre.[39]

On January 20, 2009, Topol began a farewell tour of _Fiddler on the Roof_ as
Tevye, opening in Wilmington, Delaware. He was forced to withdraw from the
tour in Boston owing to a shoulder injury, and was replaced by Theodore Bikel
and Harvey Fierstein, both of whom had portrayed Tevye on Broadway.[3] Topol
estimated that he performed the role more than 3,500 times.[3][13][17]

In 1976, Topol played the lead role of the baker, Amiable, in the new musical
_The Baker's Wife_ , but was fired after eight months by producer David
Merrick. In her autobiography, Patti LuPone, his co-star in the production,
claimed that Topol had behaved unprofessionally on stage and had a strained
relationship with her off-stage.[40] The show's composer, Stephen Schwartz,
claimed that Topol's behavior greatly disturbed the cast and directors and
resulted in the production not reaching Broadway as planned.[41] In 1988,
Topol starred in the title role in _Ziegfeld_ at the London Palladium.[11] He
returned to the London stage in 2008 in the role of Honoré, from Maurice
Chevalier's 1958 film _Gigi_.[3]

Topol appeared in more than 30 films in Israel and abroad.[17] Among his
notable English-language appearances are the title role in _Galileo_ (1975),
Dr. Hans Zarkov in _Flash Gordon_ (1980),[42] and Milos Columbo in the James
Bond film _For Your Eyes Only_ (1981).[42][43] He was said to be Israel's
"only internationally-recognized entertainer" in the 1960s through 1980s.[3]

In Israel, Topol acted in and produced dozens of films and television
series.[10] As a voice artist, he dubbed the Hebrew-language versions of _The
Jungle Book_ and two films in the _Harry Potter_ film series.[17][13] He is
also a playwright and screenwriter.[14]

He was featured on two BBC One programs, the six-part series _Topol's Israel_
(1985) and earlier _It's Topol_ (1968).[9][44] A Hebrew-language documentary
of his life, _Chaim Topol – Life as a Film_ , aired on Israel's Channel 1 in
2011, featuring interviews with his longtime actor friends in Israel and
abroad.[7]

A baritone,[7] Topol recorded several singles and albums, including film
soundtracks, children's songs, and Israeli war songs. His albums include
_Topol With Roger Webb And His Orchestra - Topol '68_ (1967), _Topol Sings
Israeli Freedom Songs_ (1967), _War Songs By Topol_ (1968), and _Topol's
Israel_ (1984). He appeared on the soundtrack albums for the film production
of _Fiddler on the Roof_ (1971) and the television production of _The Going Up
Of David Lev_ (2010).[45]

His autobiography, _Topol by Topol_ , was published in London by Weindenfel
and Nicholson (1981).[9][36] He also authored _To Life!_ (1994) and _Topol's
Treasury of Jewish Humor, Wit and Wisdom_ (1995).[36]

Topol has illustrated approximately 25 books in both Hebrew and English.[10]
He has also produced drawings of Israeli national figures. His sketches of
Israeli presidents were reproduced in a 2013 stamp series issued by the Israel
Philatelic Federation,[10] as was his self-portrait as Tevye for a 2014
commemorative stamp marking the 50th anniversary of the Broadway debut of
_Fiddler on the Roof_.[46]

In 1967, Topol founded Variety Israel, an organization serving children with
special needs.[10][47] He is also a co-founder and chairman of the board of
Jordan River Village, a year-round camp for Arab and Jewish children with
life-threatening illnesses, which opened in 2012.[10][48]

Topol was a recipient of Israel's Kinor David award in arts and entertainment
in 1964.[49] He received a Best Actor award from the San Sebastián
International Film Festival for his performance in the 1972 film _Follow
Me!_[10] In 2008, he was named an Outstanding Member of the Israel Festival
for his contribution to Israeli culture.[10][50]

In 2014, the University of Haifa conferred upon Topol an honorary degree in
recognition of his 50 years of activity in Israel's cultural and public
life.[10] In 2015, he received the Israel Prize for lifetime
achievement.[47][17]

Topol married Galia Finkelstein in October 1956. They have one son and two
daughters.[3] The couple resides in Galia's childhood home in Tel Aviv.[17]
Topol's hobbies include sketching and sculpting.[3]

Sources:[4][9]

