**Chase Jordan Headley** (born May 9, 1984) is an American former professional
baseball third baseman. A switch-hitter, Headley made his Major League
Baseball (MLB) debut with the San Diego Padres in 2007, and has also played
for the New York Yankees.

Headley played college baseball for the Pacific Tigers and Tennessee
Volunteers, before the Padres selected him in the 2005 MLB draft. During the
2012 season, Headley led the National League (NL) in runs batted in (RBIs) and
was honored for his hitting with a Silver Slugger Award. He also won a Gold
Glove Award for his defense. The Padres traded Headley to the Yankees during
the 2014 season, and he was eventually traded back following the 2017 season.

Headley graduated as valedictorian from Fountain-Fort Carson High School in
Fountain, Colorado, in 2002. He distinguished himself in two sports, receiving
four varsity letters in both baseball and basketball. In baseball, he was a
three-time Colorado All-State player, and was named to the South Metro All-
League team for all four of his seasons. Other high school honors included
being named 2002 Player of the Year by the _Colorado Springs Gazette_ , 2002
Male Scholar-Athlete of the Year by Rotary International/KRDO-TV, and 2002
Male Athlete of the Year by the Fellowship of Christian Athletes. He was
selected to play in the 2002 Colorado Rockies Senior All-Star Game, in which
he hit a home run in his first time at bat. He also played two seasons with
the Colorado Rockies Select Scout Team, and in the National Baseball Congress
World Series. In basketball, he was named to the All-Conference squad for two
seasons.[1]

Headley enrolled at the University of the Pacific and continued to play
baseball in college, playing shortstop for the Pacific Tigers. He transitioned
to third base, which would become his primary position, when he transferred to
the University of Tennessee in 2003 to play for the Tennessee Volunteers.
During his sophomore year at Tennessee, he had meniscus surgery on his knee,
and a hamstring injury.[2] He recovered, however, and worked out 62 walks
(breaking Todd Helton's 1995 school record), approached the college's single-
season mark for on-base percentage (OBP), and was named the 2004 team Most
Valuable Player.[1] He became an Academic All-American with a 3.63 grade point
average, majoring in sports management.[3] In 2004, he played collegiate
summer baseball for the Cotuit Kettleers of the Cape Cod Baseball League.[4]

The San Diego Padres drafted Headley in the second round of the 2005 Major
League Baseball draft.[3]

Headley first played professionally with the Eugene Emeralds of the Class
A-Short Season Northwest League, where he was described as a team
"mainstay,"[5] then for the Lake Elsinore Storm of the Class A-Advanced
California League, where he was called "one of the top prospects in the
Padres' organization."[6] In 2006, he was one of seven players representing
the Padres organization in the Arizona Fall League, playing for the Peoria
Saguaros.[7] He was the only one who had not played in a Class AA league
before.[8]

The _San Diego Union-Tribune_ called Headley the Padres' best eventual
prospect to fill the third base position, though it theorized it would take
two years.[9]

Headley says:

Headley was named the 2007 Texas League Player of the Year, after hitting
.330/.437/.580 with a 1.016 OPS and leading the league in many fielding stats
for third basemen. He did strike out 114 times, though, in just 443 at bats.

Headley hit well in spring training in 2008, .371 with a team-leading 12 RBIs,
but was sent to the Portland Beavers of the Class AAA Pacific Coast Leagueto
get more experience playing left field. In 65 games in Portland, he hit 13 HRs
and 24 doubles, batted .305/.383/.556, and was then called up to the Padres.

On June 15, 2007, after hitting .357 for the San Antonio Missions of the
Double-A Texas League, Headley was brought up for 8 games because of an injury
to Padres third baseman Kevin Kouzmanoff. He made his major league debut
against the Chicago Cubs at Wrigley Field. His first major league hit came on
June 17; a single to center field in the second inning against the Cubs.
Headley finished the season in the majors.[ _citation needed_ ]

Headley was again called up on June 17, 2008, and went 2–4 with two strikeouts
against the Yankees at Yankee Stadium. He picked up his first major league
home run the following night, an eighth inning shot off Kyle Farnsworth.
Headley batted .269/.337/.420, with nine home runs and 104 strikeouts in 331
at bats that year.[ _citation needed_ ]

Headley began the 2009 season as the Padres' starting left fielder. On July
10, he was the only player to reach base during Jonathan Sánchez's no-hitter,
reaching on an error by Juan Uribe, and ending the perfect game bid after 22
straight retirements. He finished the season with a .262 BA, 12 HR, 64 RBIs
and a .734 OPS. Headley also had the second-highest Range Factor/Game as LF.[
_citation needed_ ]

In early January 2010, the Padres traded third baseman Kevin Kouzmanoff to the
Oakland Athletics, moving Headley back to third base, his original position.
On April 16, Headley hit a walk-off three-run HR off Diamondbacks pitcher Juan
Gutierrez, snapping the Padres two-game losing streak. Headley finished the
season with a .264 batting average, 11 HR, 17 SB and a .702 OPS. He led the
National League in games played at third base and appeared in the top 10 for
Defensive WAR (1.5), Games Played (161), At Bats (610), Plate Appearances
(674), singles, assists at 3B, and fielding % at 3B (.966).[ _citation needed_
]

Headley had multiple career bests in 2011, batting .289/.374/.399 with a .773
OPS. But an injury limited Headley to only 4 home runs in 381 at bats. He also
led the National league in putouts at 3B.[ _citation needed_ ]

During spring training in 2012, Headley set initial goals of hitting 15 home
runs and recording 75 RBIs in the upcoming season after a discussion with
former Padre and Hall of Fame outfielder Dave Winfield. While the Padres were
extending contracts of some of their players, they did not pursue a deal with
Headley due to the potential of third base prospects Jedd Gyorko and Logan
Forsythe. Headley was rumored to be traded but was kept at the trade deadline
in July.[11][12] He was named the NL Player of the Week for the week ending
August 12 in 2012. He was later named NL Player of the Month for August,
becoming the first Padre to be so honored since Tony Gwynn won the award in
May 1997. Headley that month was tied for the major league lead in home runs
(10) and led the majors with 31 RBIs. He hit .306 (33-for-108) in August with
20 runs scored and a .611 slugging percentage (SLG).[13] He earned a second
consecutive Player of the Month honor in September after hitting .324 that
month with nine homers, 30 RBIs, a .410 OBP, and a .645 SLG. He was the second
Padre to win Player of the Month in consecutive months, the first being third
baseman Ken Caminiti in August and September of 1996.[14] He became the first
Padre to ever have more than one 30-RBI month. Over the final 57 games of the
season, he batted .313 with 19 homers, 44 runs scored and 63 RBIs.[11]

Headley was unanimously voted the Padre Player of the Year by the San Diego
chapter of the Baseball Writers' Association of America (BBWAA) after hitting
.286 and leading the league in RBIs with 115.[14][15] He joined Winfield (118
in 1979) as the only Padres to lead the league in RBIs. Headley set career
highs in hits (173), runs (95), home runs (31), walks (86), RBIs, total bases
(301), OBP (.376) and SLG (.498) and matched career highs in games played
(161), doubles (31), and steals (17). He reached base in 146 games, breaking
the Padres record held by Gwynn (144 in 1987)[14][16]

Headley won a Gold Glove Award after leading all major league third basemen in
games played (159) and assists (315) and the National League in total chances
(425).[17] He also won a Silver Slugger Award after leading all NL third
basemen in home runs, runs scored, and walks. He was the eighth third baseman
in NL history to win a Gold Glove and a Silver Slugger in the same
season.[15][18] Headley finished in fifth place with 127 votes in the voting
for the NL Most Valuable Player (MVP) award,[19] and won the This Year in
Baseball award for "MLB Breakout Hitter of the Year".[20]

After making $3.475 million in 2012, Headley was under team control for the
following two seasons with San Diego but eligible for salary arbitration.[11]

On January 30, 2013, Headley signed a one-year contract worth $8.575 million
with San Diego.[21] On March 17 during spring training, he fractured the tip
of his left thumb when it got caught under the second base bag while he was
sliding feet-first to break up a double play.[22] He started the 2013 season
on the disabled list, and returned exactly a month after the injury on April
17.[23] He also played through a torn meniscus in his left knee during the
season, which began giving him problems during spring training. His offensive
production slipped from the previous season. At season's end, Headley admitted
his knee troubles "probably" contributed to his decline. He was scheduled to
undergo arthroscopic surgery on his knee during the offseason.[24]

In 77 games with the Padres in 2014, Headley batted .229 with a .296 OBP.[25]

On July 22, 2014, the Padres traded Headley to the New York Yankees in
exchange for Yangervis Solarte and Rafael De Paula.[26][27] Later that same
day, after shaving his beard to comply with Yankee policy, Headley drove in
the winning run for the Yanks with a walk-off single in the bottom of the 14th
inning to seal a 2-1 victory over the Texas Rangers. [28] On September 4,
2014, Headley hit a walk-off solo home run off Red Sox closer Koji Uehara to
give the Yankees a come from behind 5-4 victory. On September 11, 2014 Headley
was hit in the face with a 97 m.p.h. fastball. He was able to walk off the
field under his own power, although he required stitches on his chin.[29] In
58 games with the Yankees, he had a .371 OBP, which was the fifth highest
among third basemen over that span.[25]

On December 15, Headley returned to the Yankees, agreeing to a reported four-
year, $52 million contract.[25] On July 3, 2015, Headley got his 1,000th
career hit.[30] In 2015, Headley batted .259 with 11 home runs and 62 RBIs.
2015 was a poor season defensively for Headley, as he committed a career-high
23 errors.[31]

Headley began the 2016 hitting .150 in April. He did not get his first extra-
base hit until May 12, a two-run home run against the Kansas City Royals.[32]
Headley finished 2016 batting .253 with 14 home runs and 53 RBIs. 2016 was a
much better season defensively for Headley, as he committed only 10 errors.

Headley began the 2017 season batting .301 with 10 extra-base hits in April.
However, he then batted .165 in the month of May. On May 12, Headley was
ejected by Adrian Johnson for having a heated exchange. Headley fouled a ball
off after trying to pull back a bunt attempt, in which the ball seemingly hit
his hand. After a brief standout from the batter's box, umpire Adrian Johnson
unexpectedly accused Headley for being out of the box for too long, leading to
the argument.[33]

With the Yankees' acquisition of third baseman Todd Frazier from the Chicago
White Sox, it was announced that Headley would move to first base.[34]

On December 12, 2017, the Yankees traded Headley and Bryan Mitchell to the San
Diego Padres for Jabari Blash.[35] He began the 2018 season batting 1-for-28
(.036) and began to lose playing time to Christian Villanueva and Cory
Spangenberg.[36] On May 12, the Padres designated Headley for assignment. In
58 plate appearances, Headley had a .115 batting average and a .233 on-base
percentage.[37][38] He was released on May 18.[39]

He and his wife Casey married on November 15, 2008. The couple has two sons
together.[40]

