**Chemical kinetics** , also known as **reaction kinetics** , is the branch of
physical chemistry that is concerned with understanding the rates of chemical
reactions. It is to be contrasted with thermodynamics, which deals with the
direction in which a process occurs but in itself tells nothing about its
rate. Chemical kinetics includes investigations of how different experimental
conditions can influence the speed of a chemical reaction and yield
information about the reaction's mechanism and transition states, as well as
the construction of mathematical models that also can describe the
characteristics of a chemical reaction.

In 1864, Peter Waage and Cato Guldberg pioneered the development of chemical
kinetics by formulating the law of mass action, which states that the speed of
a chemical reaction is proportional to the quantity of the reacting
substances.[1][2][3]

Van 't Hoff studied chemical dynamics and in 1884 published his famous "Études
de dynamique chimique".[4] In 1901 he was awarded by the first Nobel Prize in
Chemistry "in recognition of the extraordinary services he has rendered by the
discovery of the laws of chemical dynamics and osmotic pressure in
solutions".[5] After van 't Hoff, chemical kinetics deals with the
experimental determination of reaction rates from which rate laws and rate
constants are derived. Relatively simple rate laws exist for zero order
reactions (for which reaction rates are independent of concentration), first
order reactions, and second order reactions, and can be derived for others.
Elementary reactions follow the law of mass action, but the rate law of
stepwise reactions has to be derived by combining the rate laws of the various
elementary steps, and can become rather complex. In consecutive reactions, the
rate-determining step often determines the kinetics. In consecutive first
order reactions, a steady state approximation can simplify the rate law. The
activation energy for a reaction is experimentally determined through the
Arrhenius equation and the Eyring equation. The main factors that influence
the reaction rate include: the physical state of the reactants, the
concentrations of the reactants, the temperature at which the reaction occurs,
and whether or not any catalysts are present in the reaction.

Gorban and Yablonsky have suggested that the history of chemical dynamics can
be divided into three eras.[6] The first is the van 't Hoff wave searching for
the general laws of chemical reactions and relating kinetics to
thermodynamics. The second may be called the Semenov\--Hinshelwood wave with
emphasis on reaction mechanisms, especially for chain reactions. The third is
associated with Aris and the detailed mathematical description of chemical
reaction networks.

The reaction rate varies depending upon what substances are reacting.
Acid/base reactions, the formation of salts, and ion exchange are usually fast
reactions. When covalent bond formation takes place between the molecules and
when large molecules are formed, the reactions tend to be slower.

The nature and strength of bonds in reactant molecules greatly influence the
rate of their transformation into products.

The physical state (solid, liquid, or gas) of a reactant is also an important
factor of the rate of change. When reactants are in the same phase, as in
aqueous solution, thermal motion brings them into contact. However, when they
are in different phases, the reaction is limited to the interface between the
reactants. Reaction can occur only at their area of contact; in the case of a
liquid and a gas, at the surface of the liquid. Vigorous shaking and stirring
may be needed to bring the reaction to completion. This means that the more
finely divided a solid or liquid reactant the greater its surface area per
unit volume and the more contact it with the other reactant, thus the faster
the reaction. To make an analogy, for example, when one starts a fire, one
uses wood chips and small branches — one does not start with large logs right
away. In organic chemistry, on water reactions are the exception to the rule
that homogeneous reactions take place faster than heterogeneous reactions.

In a solid, only those particles that are at the surface can be involved in a
reaction. Crushing a solid into smaller parts means that more particles are
present at the surface, and the frequency of collisions between these and
reactant particles increases, and so reaction occurs more rapidly. For
example, Sherbet (powder) is a mixture of very fine powder of malic acid (a
weak organic acid) and sodium hydrogen carbonate. On contact with the saliva
in the mouth, these chemicals quickly dissolve and react, releasing carbon
dioxide and providing for the fizzy sensation. Also, fireworks manufacturers
modify the surface area of solid reactants to control the rate at which the
fuels in fireworks are oxidised, using this to create different effects. For
example, finely divided aluminium confined in a shell explodes violently. If
larger pieces of aluminium are used, the reaction is slower and sparks are
seen as pieces of burning metal are ejected.

The reactions are due to collisions of reactant species. The frequency with
which the molecules or ions collide depends upon their concentrations. The
more crowded the molecules are, the more likely they are to collide and react
with one another. Thus, an increase in the concentrations of the reactants
will usually result in the corresponding increase in the reaction rate, while
a decrease in the concentrations will usually have a reverse effect. For
example, combustion will occur more rapidly in pure oxygen than in air (21%
oxygen).

The rate equation shows the detailed dependence of the reaction rate on the
concentrations of reactants and other species present. Different mathematical
forms are possible depending on the reaction mechanism. The actual rate
equation for a given reaction is determined experimentally and provides
information about the reaction mechanism. The mathematical expression of the
rate equation is often given by

Here  k {\displaystyle k}
![k](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c3c9a2c7b599b37105512c5d570edc034056dd40)
is the reaction rate constant,  c i {\displaystyle c_{i}}
![c_{i}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/01acb7953ba52c2aa44264b5d0f8fd223aa178a2)
is the molar concentration of reactant _i_ and  m i {\displaystyle m_{i}}
![m_{i}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/95ec8e804f69706d3f5ad235f4f983220c8df7c2)
is the partial order of reaction for this reactant. The partial order for a
reactant can only be determined experimentally and is often different from its
stoichiometric coefficient.

Temperature usually has a major effect on the rate of a chemical reaction.
Molecules at a higher temperature have more thermal energy. Although collision
frequency is greater at higher temperatures, this alone contributes only a
very small proportion to the increase in rate of reaction. Much more important
is the fact that the proportion of reactant molecules with sufficient energy
to react (energy greater than activation energy: _E_ > _E_ _a_ ) is
significantly higher and is explained in detail by the Maxwell–Boltzmann
distribution of molecular energies.

The 'rule of thumb' that the rate of chemical reactions doubles for every 10
°C temperature rise is a common misconception. This may have been generalized
from the special case of biological systems, where the _α_ (temperature
coefficient) is often between 1.5 and 2.5.

A reaction's kinetics can also be studied with a temperature jump approach.
This involves using a sharp rise in temperature and observing the relaxation
time of the return to equilibrium. A particularly useful form of temperature
jump apparatus is a shock tube, which can rapidly jump a gas's temperature by
more than 1000 degrees.

A catalyst is a substance that alters the rate of a chemical reaction but
remains chemically unchanged afterwards. The catalyst increases the rate of
the reaction by providing a different reaction mechanism to occur with a lower
activation energy. In autocatalysis a reaction product is itself a catalyst
for that reaction leading to positive feedback. Proteins that act as catalysts
in biochemical reactions are called enzymes. Michaelis–Menten kinetics
describe the rate of enzyme mediated reactions. A catalyst does not affect the
position of the equilibrium, as the catalyst speeds up the backward and
forward reactions equally.

In certain organic molecules, specific substituents can have an influence on
reaction rate in neighbouring group participation.[ _citation needed_ ]

Increasing the pressure in a gaseous reaction will increase the number of
collisions between reactants, increasing the rate of reaction. This is because
the activity of a gas is directly proportional to the partial pressure of the
gas. This is similar to the effect of increasing the concentration of a
solution.

In addition to this straightforward mass-action effect, the rate coefficients
themselves can change due to pressure. The rate coefficients and products of
many high-temperature gas-phase reactions change if an inert gas is added to
the mixture; variations on this effect are called **fall-off** and **chemical
activation**. These phenomena are due to exothermic or endothermic reactions
occurring faster than heat transfer, causing the reacting molecules to have
non-thermal energy distributions (non-Boltzmann distribution). Increasing the
pressure increases the heat transfer rate between the reacting molecules and
the rest of the system, reducing this effect.

Condensed-phase rate coefficients can also be affected by (very high)
pressure; this is a completely different effect than fall-off or chemical-
activation. It is often studied using diamond anvils.

A reaction's kinetics can also be studied with a pressure jump approach. This
involves making fast changes in pressure and observing the relaxation time of
the return to equilibrium.

The activation energy for a chemical reaction can be provided when one
reactant molecule absorbs light of suitable wavelength and is promoted to an
excited state. The study of reactions initiated by light is photochemistry,
one prominent example being photosynthesis.

The experimental determination of reaction rates involves measuring how the
concentrations of reactants or products change over time. For example, the
concentration of a reactant can be measured by spectrophotometry at a
wavelength where no other reactant or product in the system absorbs light.

For reactions which take at least several minutes, it is possible to start the
observations after the reactants have been mixed at the temperature of
interest.

For faster reactions, the time required to mix the reactants and bring them to
a specified temperature may be comparable or longer than the half-life of the
reaction.[7] Special methods to start fast reactions without slow mixing step
include

While chemical kinetics is concerned with the rate of a chemical reaction,
thermodynamics determines the extent to which reactions occur. In a reversible
reaction, chemical equilibrium is reached when the rates of the forward and
reverse reactions are equal [the principle of dynamic equilibrium ] and the
concentrations of the reactants and Products no longer change. This is
demonstrated by, for example, the Haber–Bosch process for combining nitrogen
and hydrogen to produce ammonia. Chemical clock reactions such as the
Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction demonstrate that component concentrations can
oscillate for a long time before finally attaining the equilibrium.

In general terms, the free energy change (ΔG) of a reaction determines whether
a chemical change will take place, but kinetics describes how fast the
reaction is. A reaction can be very exothermic and have a very positive
entropy change but will not happen in practice if the reaction is too slow. If
a reactant can produce two different products, the thermodynamically most
stable one will in general form, except in special circumstances when the
reaction is said to be under kinetic reaction control. The Curtin–Hammett
principle applies when determining the product ratio for two reactants
interconverting rapidly, each going to a different product. It is possible to
make predictions about reaction rate constants for a reaction from free-energy
relationships.

The kinetic isotope effect is the difference in the rate of a chemical
reaction when an atom in one of the reactants is replaced by one of its
isotopes.

Chemical kinetics provides information on residence time and heat transfer in
a chemical reactor in chemical engineering and the molar mass distribution in
polymer chemistry. It is also provides information in corrosion engineering.

The mathematical models that describe chemical reaction kinetics provide
chemists and chemical engineers with tools to better understand and describe
chemical processes such as food decomposition, microorganism growth,
stratospheric ozone decomposition, and the chemistry of biological systems.
These models can also be used in the design or modification of chemical
reactors to optimize product yield, more efficiently separate products, and
eliminate environmentally harmful by-products. When performing catalytic
cracking of heavy hydrocarbons into gasoline and light gas, for example,
kinetic models can be used to find the temperature and pressure at which the
highest yield of heavy hydrocarbons into gasoline will occur.

Chemical Kinetics is frequently validated and explored through modeling in
specialized packages as a function of ordinary differential equation-solving
(ODE-solving) and curve-fitting.[16]

