" **Choose or Lose** " is the eighteenth episode of the seventh season of
_Pretty Little Liars_ , and the show's 158th episode overall, which premiered
on the Freeform network in the United States on June 13, 2017.[1] The episode
was directed by Norman Buckley and written by Charlie Craig. In this episode,
the Liars finally discover that Aria (Lucy Hale) has been working with 'A.D.'
after Mona (Janel Parrish) investigated on Aria. Lieutenant Tanner (Roma
Maffia) returns to Rosewood to work on the Dunhill's homicide case, quickly
targeting the Liars on her radar. Caleb (Tyler Blackburn) and Hanna (Ashley
Benson) secretly marry, while Alison (Sasha Pieterse) and Emily (Shay
Mitchell) step forward with their relationship.

Rosewood P.D. officers confiscate the Liars' personal stuff and cellphones
through search warrants. Enraged, Spencer heads to the station to understand
what's going on, and discovers that Detective Tanner is now handling the
Dunhill case. Tanner expresses her concern about the possibility of the Liars
being involved in the case, and indirectly threatens Spencer, saying that she
always found them guilty of something, just did not know of what exactly.
After her phone was taken, Aria discovers another one hidden inside an air
duct that 'A.D.' left to communicate with her. Aria claims to meet 'A.D.'
since she is a reliable person, and the tormentor sets a date, as long as Aria
wears her uniform. In a room of The Radley, given by Hanna's mother, the Liars
and Caleb get together to discuss the Dunhill's murder when the board game
begins a new round: "Choose or Lose". The Liars have to choose one of them to
go to jail accused of the murder or all of them go. Mona arrives shortly
thereafter and warns the girls that she thinks Aria is on the 'A.D.' team. The
girls initially don't believe, but Mona exhibits evidence and a recording of
Aria and 'A.D.', leaving them in panic. Detective Tanner finds pieces of a
windshield in the drain of Spencer's bathroom with traces of blood.

At night, Aria goes to the meeting place which 'A.D.' has set on. However, the
tormentor doesn't show up and Aria is caught by the Liars, who get devastated
when Aria says that she needed to protect Ezra, so she joined 'A.D.' Aria
explains that, six years earlier, after Ezra revealed to be writing a book
about Alison, she filled a complaint protocol against Ezra, but never reported
it, and somehow 'A.D.' had access to it, threatening her right after. Tanner
calls Alison asking for their presence at the station, and the girls leave
Aria alone in the woods. At the police station, Tanner gives the girls a
chance to tell their side of the story, but Spencer denies the opportunity.
Again, the girls leave Aria alone, punishing her for breaking Alison's baby's
room and for destroying Spencer's family.

The next morning, Spencer goes to Ezra's apartment to talk to Aria, giving her
a photo of her younger ones, before Alison's disappearance. They try to
reconcile, but Tanner and her convoy appear suddenly, returning Aria's things
and saying they found footage of Aria outside of Rosewood on the day of
Archer's death, sparing her of any charges. Spencer leaves the apartment
angrily. Ashley is still worried about Hanna and that she might be in trouble.
However, her fade away when Caleb and Hanna get married at the courthouse with
Ashley as a witness. Emily and Alison have sex during an improvised picnic
prepared by Alison. Aria tells Ezra she has something to tell to him, but
claims she needs to kiss him one last time, since this secret could ruin them.
Spencer visits Toby in his cabin and they have sex. While investigating, Caleb
and Ezra find the cell tower location from which the game phone has been
sending signals from, and later discover that they are being sent from Mona's
house. While leaving to find Spencer, Aria hears a loud sound in the back of
her car and opens the trunk to find Archer's body. A cop arrives right after.

Every member of the ensemble cast appears in this installment, with the
exception of Andrea Parker. Laura Leighton appears in the episode, making it
her second credit as a regular character on Season 7. The episode also
features recurring appearances of Keegan Allen as Toby Cavanaugh, Roma Maffia
as Lieutenant Linda Tanner, and Jim Titus as Detective Barry Maple. Maffia
returns for the series on this episode after last appearing on the second half
of the previous season.

Following is the list of billed cast.

"Choose or Lose" was written by Charlie Craig and directed by Norman Buckley,
making it their last work on the show.[2] The table-read occurred on September
19, 2016.[3] The installment was filmed in September 2016 in and around Los
Angeles, California, mostly on the Warner Bros. studio backlot in
Burbank.[4][5]

"Choose or Lose" premiered on Freeform on June 13, 2017, to an audience of
0.96 million viewers, scoring a 0.4 Nielsen rating/share in the adults among
the 18â€“49 demographic.[6] This was a slightly decrease from the previous
episode.

Gavin Hetherington gave the episode a mixed reviews, stating: "More
revelations could have happened in this episode to help clear things up
instead of wasting time doing other things, but I'm now hoping the big things
will be wrapped up in a satisfactory way."[7] Isabella Biedenharn of
_Entertainment Weekly_ gave the episode a B+ letter rating.[8]

