The **Christian Broadcasting Network** ( **CBN** ) is an American conservative
evangelical religious television network and production company. Founded by
televangelist Pat Robertson, its headquarters and main studios are based in
Virginia Beach, Virginia, United States. CBN has been described as having been
"at the forefront of the culture wars since the network’s inception in the
early 1960s."[2]

CBN was founded in 1960 in Portsmouth, Virginia by Pat Robertson, who had
recently become a born-again Christian.[2] In late 1961, he began broadcasting
religious content, funded by small donations from individuals and local
churches.[2] One of the company's mainstays is _The 700 Club_ , which uses a
religious variety program that mixes sermons, interviews, and religious music
(such as hymns and gospel).[2] The name refers to a fundraising drive where
Robertson successfully sought 700 viewers willing to contribute $10 a month to
sustain the station.[2] _The 700 Club_ is the longest-running program in the
variety format.[3] Initially focused on devotional content, _The 700 Club_
became increasingly political in the late 1970s, adding news segments.[2]

Today, the network's journalistic branch, CBN News, provides news updates to
_The 700 Club_ and produces religious news programs such as _CBN NewsWatch_
and _Christian World News_ ; it also produces a special hour-long block of
prime time election coverage hosted by Robertson during American presidential
and mid-term elections, airing on Freeform, which also carries _The 700 Club_
and the half-hour talk show _700 Club Interactive_. CBN also operates online
channels on its website, such as the CBN News Channel.[4]

CBN Asia manages Operation Blessing International Relief and Development
Corporation (OBI), an international relief and missionary effort, and has
international programming, producing local programs including _Solusi_ in
Indonesia and _From Heart to Heart_ in Thailand; CBN India produces three
shows, a daily Hindi program _Ek Nayee Zindagi_ , a bi-weekly Telugu program
_Nireekshana_ and an award-winning weekly Bengali program _Samadhan_.[5] The
company also produces versions of _The 700 Club_ aimed at Latin American (
_Club 700 Hoy_ ) and British audiences ( _The 700 Club With Paul and Fiona_
).[6] CBN has broadcast programs in over 70 languages.

On April 29, 1977, CBN launched a religious cable network, the CBN Satellite
Service. The channel was later revamped as the CBN Cable Network in 1981, and
began incorporating secular programming alongside religious content. In August
1988, it rebranded as The CBN Family Channel (later dropping the "CBN" name
outright in September 1990), before selling it to International Family
Entertainment (owned by Robertson's son, Timothy) two years later as the
network became too profitable for CBN to maintain its nonprofit status. In
September 1990, it rebranded as The Family Channel. IFE later sold it to News
Corporation in 1997 (rebranding it as the Fox Family Channel in August 1998),
which later sold it to The Walt Disney Company in 2001 (and rebranding it as
ABC Family, now known as Freeform). The terms of the sale to International
Family Entertainment stipulated that the channel continue carrying two CBN
programs, including _The 700 Club_. It is often thought the deal stipulated
that the channel maintain the word "Family" in its name in perpetuity, however
this was later dismissed by network executives as an urban legend.[7]

CBN now serves mainly as a production company for _The 700 Club_ , and four
other syndicated shows: _CBN NewsWatch_ , _Christian World News_ , _700 Club
Interactive_ and _The Brody File_ , a news-analysis program hosted by
political journalist David Brody. CBN and Regent University jointly produced
the film _First Landing_.[8]

Some of CBN's programs also air on the Trinity Broadcasting Network,
Cornerstone Television, FamilyNet, LeSEA Broadcasting Corporation, TCT and
Middle East Television (which was founded and owned by CBN, until it was sold
to LeSEA in the early 2000s), all of which are Evangelical Christian networks.
The secular commercial stations that continue to air _The 700 Club_ in
syndication (along with Freeform) air CBN's annual telethon during the last
week of January.

CBN entered into the broadcasting industry in October 1961, when WYAH-TV in
Portsmouth – the group's flagship station – signed on the air. Initially
madeup of Christian programming, the station's schedule took a more secular
tone in the early 1970s. In 1962 WYAH-TV was joined by an FM sister station,
Norfolk-licensed WXRI, which broadcast a format of Christian music and
teaching programs. Both WXRI and WYAH-TV were based in Portsmouth, and
remained there after CBN relocated its main headquarters to Virginia Beach in
1980.

CBN later signed on WHAE-TV in Atlanta in June 1971. In January 1973, CBN
purchased KBFI-TV in Dallas and changed its callsign to KXTX-TV; that April,
CBN and Doubleday Broadcasting became involved in a license trade in which CBN
acquired Doubleday's license to operate a competing station, KDTV; the KXTX-TV
call sign, existing programs and programming was moved by CBN to the former
Doubleday-owned frequency. The ministry signed-on its final station, WXNE-TV
in Boston, in October 1977. The ministry's broadcasting subsidiary, the
Continental Broadcasting Network, ran these four outlets as family-oriented
independent stations – featuring a mix of religious programming (which took up
most of its stations' Sunday schedules) and secular acquired programs,
including westerns, sitcoms, drama series and children's programming – a
format that would be later adopted by the LeSEA Broadcasting Corporation when
it began launching its own television stations in the 1970s.

In addition to WXRI, from 1969 to 1982 CBN also owned a simulcast network of
five FM radio stations in upstate New York (WBIV in Wethersfield, WEIV in
Ithaca, WJIV in Cherry Valley, WMIV in South Bristol and WOIV in DeRuyter),
known as **CBN Northeast** ; the stations originally signed on in 1948 by a
farming cooperative as the Rural Radio Network.

CBN gradually sold all its broadcast stations during the late 1980s and 1990s.
In the following tables, former CBN-owned stations are arranged alphabetically
by state and community of license.

Note: Two boldface asterisks appearing following a station's call letters (
****** ) indicate a station which was built and signed-on by CBN.

In addition, CBN planned to build a television station in Richmond, Virginia,
WRNX on UHF channel 63. However, CBN sold the construction permit for that
station to National Capitol Christian Television in 1982, which signed on the
station as WTLL in 1984. That station was eventually sold and in 1986,
converted into secular independent station WVRN-TV, which shut down in 1988.

Notes:

**1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7**

NBC  
_Wall Street Journal_  
Agence France-Presse  
MSNBC  
Bloomberg BNA  
_Washington Examiner_  
Univision

Fox News  
CBS Radio  
AP Radio  
Foreign Pool  
_Time_  
Yahoo! News  
_Dallas Morning News_

CBS News  
Bloomberg  
McClatchy  
_Washington Times_  
Sirius XM  
Salem Radio  
_Globe_/ _Roll Call_

AP  
NPR  
AURN  
_The Hill_  
Regionals  
Newsmax  
CBN

ABC News  
_Washington Post_  
Politico  
Fox News Radio  
_CSM_/ _NY Post_  
_Daily Mail_  
BBC/OAN

Reuters  
_NY Times_  
_Chicago Tribune_  
VOA  
RealClearPolitics  
_HuffPost_ / _NY Daily News_  
_BuzzFeed_/ _Daily Beast_

CNN  
_USA Today_  
ABC Radio  
_National Journal_  
Al Jazeera/PBS  
Westwood One  
_Financial Times_ / _Guardian_

