**Christopher Newport University** ( **CNU** ) is a public liberal arts
university in Newport News, Virginia. CNU is the youngest comprehensive
university in the commonwealth of Virginia. The institution is named after
Christopher Newport, who was a buccaneer (or privateer) and captain of the
_Susan Constant_ , the largest of three ships which carried settlers for the
Virginia Company in 1607, on their way to found Jamestown in the Virginia
Colony, which became the first permanent English settlement in North America.

In 1960 the city of Newport News joined together with the Commonwealth of
Virginia to create Christopher Newport College (CNC), which opened its doors
in 1961[3] and at the time was located in the old John W. Daniel School
building. The college was founded as an extension of the College of William &
Mary and offered extension courses that had already been available in the area
for some time. In 1964 the college was relocated to its current location, a
75-acre (300,000 m2) tract of land purchased and donated by the city. In this
same year, the college's first permanent building was dedicated as Christopher
Newport Hall. In 1971, CNC became a four-year college;[4] however, it remained
an extension of William & Mary until 1977 when it attained its
independence.[5] In 1992, the college became a university under the leadership
of President Anthony R. Santoro, who oversaw the building of the first
residence hall. In 1996, CNU made plans to become more competitive. Those
plans included the expansion of university property, several new buildings and
residence halls, as well as overhauling academic programs and the admission
process.

Christopher Newport University offers a variety of four-year bachelor of
science and bachelor of arts degrees. Graduate programs in applied physics and
computer science, environmental science and teaching are also available in
five-year bachelor's to master's, as well as traditional formats. Academic
programs are offered through the College of Arts and Humanities, the College
of Natural and Behavioral Sciences, and the College of Social Sciences,
including the Joseph W. Luter III School of Business.

The School of Business is accredited by the AACSB and offers bachelor's
degrees in Accounting, Finance, Management and Marketing. Worldwide, only 5%
of business schools have AACSB international accreditation.[6]

CNU's College of Arts and Humanities includes the Departments of English, Fine
Art and Art History, History, Modern and Classical Languages and Literatures,
Music, Philosophy and Religion, and Theater and Dance. The English Department
offers the major in English, with concentrations including literature and
writing. The History department offers degrees in History. For languages other
than English, the Modern & Classical Languages & Literatures department offers
degrees in German, French, Spanish, and classical studies. The department of
Philosophy and Religious Studies offers a Bachelor of Arts, and includes
religious studies and pre-seminary options for a concentration.

The Sociology & Anthropology and Social Work Departments, offer degrees in
social work and sociology. The sociology program also offers options for a
concentration with include criminology, anthropology, and general sociology
studies.

The Army Reserve Officer Training Corps has maintained a strong presence at
CNU for several years, offering classroom and field based training. The
program is a component of the College of William and Mary's ROTC program,
known as the Revolutionary Guard Battalion. It commissions several new US Army
second lieutenants each year.

The Fine Art Department, located in the back of the Ferguson Center, offers a
degree in fine arts with concentrations in art history and studio art.[7]

The Theatre & Dance Department offers a degree in theater arts with
concentrations in acting, arts administration, design/technology,
directing/dramatic literature and music/dance. The school also offers a
Bachelor of Music degree. This degree can be complemented with concentrations
in music education both instrumental and choral, performance and music
composition/theory. The music minor option, however, was dropped in 2009.

CNU participates mainly in the Capital Athletic Conference (CAC), having moved
from the USA South Athletic Conference in July 2013. The football team remains
a USA South associate member because the CAC does not sponsor football. CNU
fields a wide variety of college level teams on the Division III level. The
Freeman Center houses the basketball, volleyball, and indoor track teams,
while the lacrosse, soccer, baseball, softball, and field hockey teams play at
a complex called "Captain's Field." The football and outdoor track teams
compete at Pomoco Stadium, named for a local car dealership chain. Ratcliffe
Hall was expanded in 2012 and now includes various athletic offices as well as
the varsity gym. A sailing center is also located close to the campus along
the James River.

CNU sports club programs include ice hockey,[11] equestrian, dressage,
cycling, fishing, lacrosse, martial arts,[12] rock climbing, rugby, scuba
diving, silver storm dance, soccer, swimming, table tennis, tennis, ultimate
frisbee, rowing and volleyball.

The traditional boundaries of the Christopher Newport University campus have
been Warwick Boulevard, Shoe Lane, and Prince Drew Road in Newport News. In
recent years, however, the university has "jumped" Warwick Boulevard, buying
and demolishing properties in the immediate area to expand. The part of campus
that is east of Warwick Boulevard is referred to as "East Campus" and is
primarily used to house upper-class students.

Residence halls on campus are usually segregated into the class of student
living in them. In the recent years, new policies have been enacted that
require all freshman and sophomore students to live in an on campus housing
facility, unless they live in the commuting zone. Starting with the class of
2014, all students must live on campus during the junior year in addition to
their freshman and sophomore years.

The oldest housing facility on campus is Santoro Hall. Opened in 1992, the
hall was named in honor of then President Anthony Santoro and his wife, Carol.
This building is directly adjacent to one of the campus dining facilities, the
Hiden-Hussey Commons. Santoro Hall, along with the newer York River Hall, is
primarily used for freshman housing. York River Hall opened in 2002. This
complex, consisting of two buildings (York River East/ York River West),
houses over 500 students and is the largest residence hall on campus. Both
Santoro and York River Halls are suite-style living residence halls. In each
building, pairs of neighboring housing units share a common private restroom.
Freshman also live in portions of Potomac River Hall.

Sophomore housing currently consists of James River Hall, opened in 2000, half
of Potomac River Hall, opened in 2004, as well as Warwick River Hall, opened
in 2012.[13] James River Hall boasts a variety of floor plans, including 4-,
5-, and 6-person apartments, 4-person suites, and three 15-person Theme Units.
Potomac Hall, like York River Hall, is divided into two buildings (North/
South), and consists of suites of two bedrooms, located around a central
living room and bath. Warwick River Hall is the newest residence hall on
campus and accommodates 447 students in 4-, 5-, and 6-person suites each with
a shared living room and bathroom.

Juniors and Seniors living on campus are generally assigned to either East
Campus or Rappahannock River Hall. James River Hall also accommodates Juniors
and Seniors in apartment style dorms.[14] CNU is currently planning
construction on a dedicated upperclassmen residence, to be called "Shenandoah
Hall." It is expected to house more than 200 seniors and to open in summer
2020.[15] Starting in 2009, five sororities and four fraternities live in
Barclay Apartments, CNU's temporary Greek Village, and any additional
fraternities and sororities live in the adjacent townhouses of CNU Landing as
of 2012[update]. Completed in 2002, CNU Apartments is a complex of five
buildings of three or four stories, housing up to 355 students. These
buildings, named after Virginia-born presidents, include Washington,
Jefferson, Madison, Harrison, and Monroe.[16] The CNU Village rose to
accompany CNU Apartments in 2005, adding room for an additional 398 students
in apartment living.[17] Both the apartments and the Village feature 2 to 4
single bedroom apartments with a common living area (full kitchen, living
room/dinette, washer and dryer). Below CNU Village, along Warwick Blvd., are a
variety of eating establishments including Panera Bread, Moe's Southwest
Grill, Subway, 7-11, Sushi & Spice, and Schooners, opened by three local
restaurateurs who wanted to fill a void left by the lack of a social outlet on
campus.

The campus has two major dining facilities, Hiden-Hussey Commons and Regattas.

**Hiden-Hussey Commons**

The first dining facility on campus was originally named Harbour Lights. This
all-you-can-eat cafeteria style facility is decorated internally with nautical
memorabilia to go along with its name. In 2005 Harbour Lights was renamed to
the Hiden-Hussey Commons. Newer students just refer to it as "The Commons."
The dining hall was expanded in 2012 to include additional seating, serving
lines, and a patio.[ _citation needed_ ]

**Regattas**

Regattas Restaurant is the newest dining hall on CNU's campus. Opened in 2002
inside the David Student Union, Regattas shares a similar format to the Hiden-
Hussey Commons with the all-you-can-eat cafeteria style. Regattas, however,
sports a more up-tempo environment[ _citation needed_ ] and often features
hand made waffle cones for ice cream and custom made omelettes.[ _citation
needed_ ] It is also home to CNU's Mongolian Grill[18]. Regattas began an
expansion in 2017 which was completed in Spring of 2018.

The David Student Union (DSU) is a $36 million, 116,000-square-foot (10,800
m2) facility whose construction began in 2003 and opened September 9, 2006.
Constructed in a "Neo-Georgian" architectural style, the first floor contains
the campus Convenience Store, parallel the DSU dining facilities: The
Discovery Bistro, Discovery Cafe, Chick-fil-A, Discovery Pizza, and Regatta's.
The campus Bookstore and Convenience Store closed during the Fall 2010
semester in favor of an online bookstore and instead contains a student
lounge, admissions office, and apparel store. All on-campus students receive a
mailbox and access to a full-service Post Office located on the second floor
of the DSU. Four large conference rooms named for past U.S. Presidents are
located around a central lobby area at the top of the steps. The Ballroom is
also located on the second floor. The building provides offices for Student
Life, The Captain's Log, Career Development, International Studies, Academic
Advising, and others. Private desks with computers are provided for students
as well as quiet study sections and recreational areas. The building was named
in honor of William R. and Goldie R. David.

For the opening of the Spring 2010 semester, Christopher Newport University
opened the Lewis Archer McMurran, Jr. Hall. This building has neo-Georgian
architecture. The building is 85,000 square feet and frames the university's
Great Lawn on its western side. McMurran Hall houses the Departments of Modern
and Classical Languages and Literatures, History, English, and Government. It
has a 150-person lecture hall, two 50-person lecture halls, and over 25 other
classrooms.

To the north of McMurran Hall is Ratcliffe Hall, the former home of the
Departments of English and Government. Once CNU's gymnasium, the building was
renovated to include classroom and office space for students and faculty.
Other academic buildings on campus include Gosnold Hall, Forbes Hall, and the
Business and Technology Center (BTC Building), located across Prince Drew
Lane. Finally, the Ferguson Center for the Arts is home to the Departments of
Music and Theater & Dance.

Wingfield Hall, the former home of the Departments of Psychology and Language,
was demolished in 2011 to make way for the Joseph W. Luter Hall, home of the
school of business.

The Joseph W. Luter, III Hall is the house of the Luter School of Business.
The building, following the Neo-Georgian architecture of surrounding new
structures, has a new 100-seat tiered lecture hall, 14 traditional classrooms,
teachings labs, research labs and faculty offices.

The Mary Brock Forbes Integrated Science Building is a 156,000-square-foot
(14,500 m2) academic hall situated on the north edge of the great lawn, and
houses the College of Natural and Behavioral Science as well as the Biology,
Chemistry, Environmental Science and Psychology departments. It also includes
spaces for students to interact, 50 faculty offices, a large lecture hall, 50
classrooms, and research labs.

The university's library, renamed for Rosemary and Paul S. Trible, Jr., had a
multimillion-dollar addition completed in early 2008. The new 110,000-square-
foot (10,000 m2) facility houses most of its collection in the original
section. The new library was dedicated January 24, 2008, and fully opened at
the start of the Spring 2008 semester. The Trible Library boasts a new
Einstein's Cafe, a 24-hour study lounge, and an IT help desk.

In early 2009, the Mariners' Museum Library relocated to the Trible Library,
providing students and the community with convenient access to the largest
maritime history collection in the Western Hemisphere.[19] The Paul and
Rosemary Trible Library was slated for another expansion beginning in 2016
which would add another floor to the back portion of the facility. Due to the
renovations, the Mariners' Museum Library moved back to the Mariners' Museum
and reopened in Fall 2017.

In August 2018, the library expansion opened adding 3 floors of new space.
Additions included a 100-seat theater, expanded Media Center, a two-story
reading room, and 44 group study rooms.

In 1996 the university acquired the Ferguson High School building and
property, which was adjacent to campus. This building was used for classrooms
until it was extensively renovated to become the Ferguson Center for the Arts,
which opened in fall of 2005. Many features of the original high school, which
was located between what is now the concert hall and the music and theatre
hall, can still be seen throughout the current building. It houses a
1,725-seat concert hall which is acoustically engineered so that anyone on
stage can be heard from any seat without a microphone, A 453-seat music and
theatre hall, and a 200-seat studio theatre. It also contains two art
galleries, a dance studio, and several classrooms.

Opened in early 2013, the Pope Chapel, named for Larry Pope of Smithfield
Foods, is a 14,000-square-foot (1,300 m2) gathering place for various on
campus religious organizations located at the campus entrance across from York
River Hall and the Trible Library.

In the fall of 2015 a new administration building was opened and named
Christopher Newport Hall. The 81,000-square-foot (7,500 m2) structure houses
the Office of Admission, Office of the Registrar, Financial Aid, Housing, the
Center for Academic Success, the President's Leadership Program and the Center
for Career Planning, among others. The $42 million facility serves as a new
landmark on campus and is at the head of the Great Lawn opposite Lewis Archer
McMurran, Jr. Hall. In May 2015, towards the end of construction, Newport Hall
served as the backdrop for commencement ceremonies.

_The Captain's Log_[20] is a student run organization that acts as the
official newspaper of Christopher Newport University.

_Currents_ is CNU's completely student-run literary magazine. Students from
all disciplines may submit poetry, fiction, creative non-fiction, playwriting,
and lyrics. _Currents_ is also CNU's oldest on-campus organization.[21]

Greek life at Christopher Newport has grown in the recent years to include
eight North-American Interfraternity Conference listed fraternities, seven
National Panhellenic Conference listed sororities and four NPHC listed Greek
organizations.

NIC fraternities

NPC sororities

NPHC listed

Other fraternities

The campus has several religious organizations. These include Reformed
University Fellowship (RUF), InterVarsity Christian Fellowship (IV), Young
Life, Hillel International, Campus Crusade for Christ (CRU), Because Christ
Matters (BCM), Catholic Campus Ministry, the Canterbury Club, Fellowship of
Christian Athletes, Lutheran Student Fellowship, and The Hampton Roads Church
Student Fellowship. These organizations are now able to meet and hold events
in the Pope Chapel, which opened in early 2013.

WCNU Radio is a student-run, non-commercial, web-based radio station.[22]

