**Claudine Margaret Castelo Barretto** (born July 20, 1979) is a Filipino film
and television actress, product endorser and entrepreneur.

Barretto first appeared 1992 in ABS-CBN for a youth-oriented variety show,
_Ang TV_. She then was cast in comedy sitcom _Home Along Da Riles_ that same
year in which the film adaptation of the TV show became her official film
debut in 1993. She landed her first television drama lead role in 1997's _Mula
sa Puso_ which ran for three years and established her as a household name in
Philippine Entertainment.

She is known as **The Optimum Star** following her well-acclaimed performances
in drama series like _Mula sa Puso_ (1997–1999), _Saan Ka Man Naroroon_
(1999–2001), _Sa Dulo ng Walang Hanggan_ (2001–2003), _Marina_ (2004), _Iisa
Pa Lamang_ (2006) and box-office hit / award-winning films like _Dahil Mahal
na Mahal Kita_ (1998), _Anak_ (2000), _Got 2 Believe_ (2002), _Kailangan Kita_
(2002), _Milan_ (2004), _Nasaan Ka Man_ (2005), _Sukob_ (2006), _Etiquette for
Mistresses_ (2015).

Barretto was discovered by talent manager Douglas Quijano in 1992 through
older sister, Gretchen Barretto, also an actress. That same year, she landed
her first major role on television when she was cast for ABS-CBN's youth-
oriented variety show, _Ang TV_.

In 1993, she starred at television series _Home Along Da Riles_ with Dolphy
which further introduced her to local media. She also appeared in television
shows like _Oki Doki Doc_ (1993–2000), _Palibhasa Lalake_ (1993–1998) and
movie _May Minamahal_ (1993).

In 1995, she starred in _Pare Ko_ with Mark Anthony Fernandez and in _Oki Doki
Doc: The Movie_. She also became part of the noontime variety show _ASAP_ that
year.

In 1996, she starred in various films with Star Cinema which includes, _Radio
Romance_ , her first film with Rico Yan, _Mangarap Ka_ , her first major film
role with Mark Anthony Fernandez, and _Madrasta_ with Christopher de Leon and
Sharon Cuneta.

Barretto landed her first ever television drama series in 1997 titled _Mula sa
Puso_. The series ran for three consecutive years on ABS-CBN. That same year
she starred in films like _Home Along Da Riles 2_ with Dolphy, _Calvento
Files: The Movie_ with Rio Locsin and Diether Ocampo, and _F.L.A.M.E.S.The
Movie_ with Rico Yan, Paula Peralejo, and Boots Anson-Roa.

In 1998, she portrayed Mela in the film _Dahil Mahal na Mahal Kita_ which was
directed by Wenn V. Deramas, alongside Rico Yan and Diether Ocampo.

Then came 1999's _Saan Ka Man Naroroon_ where she portrayed as triplets in the
name of Rosario, Rosenda and Rosemarie which earned her a nomination for Best
Actress in the Asian TV Awards. Also the same year she starred in films like
_Soltera_ with Diether Ocampo and Maricel Soriano, and the film adaptation of
_Mula sa Puso_.

She also co-starred Vilma Santos in the highly-commended 2000 movie _Anak_
directed by Rory Quintos.

In 2001, she was cast as the lead role in the drama series _Sa Dulo ng Walang
Hanggan_ (2001–2003) with Carlos Agassi, Luis Alandy, and Mylene Dizon and
film _Oops! Teka Lang... Diskarte Ko 'To_ with Robin Padilla.

In 2002, she starred in a romantic-comedy film by Olivia Lamasan titled _Got 2
Believe_ with real-life partner Rico Yan. The film received critical and box
office success some noting it as one of the best romcom movies of all time and
has inspired countless films that followed it. On the same year, she did the
movie _Kailangan Kita_ with Aga Muhlach. The film was directed by Rory Quintos
in where Barretto's acting was once again acclaimed by critics and many has
cited it as one of her best works.

In 2003, she was joined by Diether Ocampo, Onemig Bondoc, Assunta De Rossi,
and Piolo Pascual in the Wenn V. Deramas' series _Buttercup_ (2003–2004).

In 2004, she portrayed a mermaid in the breakthrough fantasy television series
_Marina_ with Rafael Rosell Meryll Soriano, Agot Isidro, Snooky Serna, Malou
de Guzman and Cherie Gil. Also on the same year, she starred in the movie
Milan opposite Piolo Pascual which was directed by Olivia Lamasan. The film
received widespread critical acclaim for its original story and cinematography
and has been noted as one of the best romance movies of Philippine Cinema. Her
performance of the film also won her a FAMAS Award for Best Actress.

In 2005, she co-starred Jericho Rosales and Diether Ocampo with Gloria Diaz
and Hilda Koronel in the film _Nasaan Ka Man_. The film won her another FAMAS
Award for Best Actress and has also been cited as one of her best works. That
same year she starred in the film _Dubai_ , directed by Rory Quintos, with co-
stars Aga Muhlach and John Lloyd Cruz. She was also part of the ensemble cast
of television drama series _Ikaw ang Lahat sa Akin_ alongside Diether Ocampo,
Angelika dela Cruz, Shaina Magdayao, Bea Alonzo and John Lloyd Cruz.

In 2006, she starred in the Chito S. Roño's horror film _Sukob_ with Kris
Aquino. The movie was the highest-grossing film of that year.

In 2007, she was paired with Piolo Pascual in the television drama series
Walang Kapalit which was directed by Wenn V. Deramas.

In 2008, she was cast in _Sineserye Presents: Maligno_, a fantasy television
anthology co-starring Kim Chiu, Rafael Rosell and Diether Ocampo. Also that
same year, she landed a remarkable role in the television drama series _Iisa
Pa Lamang_ together with Angelica Panganiban, Diether Ocampo, Gabby
Concepcion, Cherry Pie Picache, and Susan Roces. The series became 2008's
hottest television primetime drama and is regarded as one of Claudine's best
televisions series.

Barretto shocked the local media in November 2009 when she broke ties with her
long-time network ABS-CBN and transferred to rival company GMA Network.[1]

In 2010, she started her own weekly drama anthology, _Claudine_ with GMA
Network. Also that same year she was a part of a movie produced by GMA Films
and Viva Films titled _In Your Eyes_ co-starring Anne Curtis and Richard
Gutierrez.

In 2011, she played lead in the television drama _Iglot_ co-starring Jolina
Magdangal and Marvin Agustin.

Barretto made a major big screen comeback in 2015 starring in the Star Cinema
movie Etiquette for Mistresses alongside Kim Chiu, Iza Calzado, Cheena Crab,
Kris Aquino and directed by Chito S. Roño. Despite the controversy of the
film, it was acclaimed critically and was a box-office hit. Claudine also
marks her first appearance on _Maalaala Mo Kaya_ after more than 20 years, in
an episode titled _"Itak/Bolo"_ which aired in October of the same year.

In 2016, she joined TV5 Network and starred in the television drama series
_Bakit Manipis ang Ulap?_ which was directed by Joel Lamangan and co-starring
Diether Ocampo, Meg Imperial, and Cesar Montano. That same year she appeared
in another _MMK_ episode titled _"Luneta Park"_ which aired in December.

In 2017, she made her first ever appearance at the  Star Magic Ball, since she
left ABS-CBN Network in 2009.

Born as Claudine Margaret Castelo Barretto on July 20, 1979 in Manila
Philippines and the youngest among seven children to Miguel and Estrella
"Inday" Barretto, Claudine is sister to other famous Filipino celebrities
Gretchen Barretto and Marjorie Barretto.

In March 2002, a month after the box-office success of their movie _Got 2
Believe_ , Barretto lost her on-screen and real-life partner of four years,
Rico Yan. The actor died of acute hemorrhagic pancreatitis cited as one of the
most shocking deaths in Philippine showbiz.[2]

Barretto married actor Raymart Santiago in March 2006 but later divorced in
2013.[3] They have two children, Sabina and Santino Santiago. In 2015, she
adopted a child and named her Quia Barretto.

Claudine along with other siblings  Marjorie and Gretchen Barretto were the
center of a controversy in 2013 following a highly-publicized feud between
them and their family.[4] But in February 2019, the rift between her older
sibling, Gretchen Barretto ended after 6 years, showing reconciliation between
the two in a series of social media posts.[5]

As a film actress, Barretto has received two FAMAS Award for Best Actress for
movies _Milan_ (2004) and _Nasaan Ka Man_ (2005) and a Luna Award for Best
Actress for the same movie, _Milan_. In 2016, she won _Dangal ng PASADO sa
Pangkatang Pagganap ng may Mataas na Papuri_ in the 18th _Gawad PASADO Awards_
for her film Etiquette for Mistresses (2015).

On television, she bagged the Best Young Actress award from _Parangal ng
Bayan_ in 1999 for _Mula Sa Puso_ and was nominated as Best Drama Actress by
the _Asian TV Awards_ in 2000 for _Saan Ka Man Naroroon_.

Barretto was awarded Box Office Queen by _Guillermo Mendoza Memorial
Scholarship Foundation_ in 2003 and 2006 for the commercial success of her
movies, _Got 2 Believe_ and _Sukob_.

Hailed as one of the _Top 20 stars who ruled the decade (2000–2009)_ by _YES!
Magazine_[8], she ranked 6th along with other notable personalites like Kris
Aquino, Judy Ann Santos, Vic Sotto and Sharon Cuneta.

In 2009, she was recognised as one of Cinema One's 15 Legends, together with
14 other iconic film stars of the Philippines who helped define Philippine
Cinema which includes Fernando Poe Jr., Dolphy, Nora Aunor, Susan Roces, Nida
Blanca, Christopher de Leon, Vilma Santos, Maricel Soriano, Aga Muhlach, Robin
Padilla, Judy Ann Santos, John Lloyd Cruz, Sharon Cuneta, and Piolo Pascual.

