**Clemson University** (/ˈklɛmsən/[5]) is a public, land-grant research
university in Clemson, South Carolina. Founded in 1889, Clemson is the second-
largest university in student population in South Carolina. For the fall 2017
semester, the university enrolled a total of 19,402 undergraduate students and
4,985 graduate students,[3] and the student/faculty ratio was 18:1.[6]
Clemson's 1,400-acre campus [7] is in the foothills of the Blue Ridge
Mountains and sits next to Lake Hartwell. The university manages the nearby
17,500-acre Clemson Experimental Forest that is used for research, education,
and recreation.

Clemson University consists of seven colleges: Agriculture, Forestry and Life
Sciences; Architecture, Arts and Humanities; Business; Behavioral, Social and
Health Sciences; Education; Engineering, Computing and Applied Sciences; and
Science.[8] _U.S. News& World Report_ ranks Clemson University tied for 24
among all national public universities.[9] Clemson University is classified as
a "Doctoral university [with] highest research activity".[10]

Thomas Green Clemson, the university's founder, came to the foothills of South
Carolina in 1838, when he married Anna Maria Calhoun, daughter of John C.
Calhoun, a South Carolina statesman and seventh U.S. Vice President.[11] When
Clemson died on April 6, 1888, he left most of his estate, which he inherited
from his wife, in his will to be used to establish a college that would teach
scientific agriculture and the mechanical arts to South Carolinians.[12] His
decision was largely influenced by future South Carolina Governor Benjamin
Tillman. Tillman lobbied the South Carolina General Assembly to create the
school as an agricultural institution for the state and the resolution passed
by only one vote.

In his will, Clemson explicitly stated he wanted the school to be modeled
after what is now Mississippi State University: "This institution, I desire,
to be under the control and management of a board of trustees, a part of whom
are hereinafter appointed, and to be modeled after the Agricultural College of
Mississippi as far as practicable."[13]

In November 1889, South Carolina Governor John Peter Richardson III signed the
bill, thus establishing the Clemson Agricultural College of South Carolina. As
a result, federal funds for agricultural education from the Morrill Land-Grant
Colleges Act and the Hatch Act of 1887 were transferred from South Carolina
College (today, the University of South Carolina) to Clemson.[11] Construction
of the college began with Hardin Hall in 1890 and then main classroom
buildings in 1891. Henry Aubrey Strode became the first president of Clemson
from 1890 to 1893. Edwin Craighead succeeded Strode in 1893. Clemson
Agricultural College formally opened in July 1893 with an initial enrollment
of 446. The common curriculum of the first incoming students was English,
history, botany, mathematics, physics and agriculture. Until 1955, the college
was also an all-white male military school.

On May 22, 1894, the main building (Tillman Hall) was destroyed by a fire,
which consumed the library, classrooms, and offices. Tillman Hall was rebuilt
in 1894 and still stands today. The first graduating class of Clemson was in
1896 with degrees in mechanical-electrical engineering and agriculture.
Clemson's first football team began in 1896 led by trainer Walter Riggs. Henry
Hartzog, graduate of The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina,
became president of Clemson in 1897. Hartzog created a textile department in
1898. Clemson became the first Southern school to train textile specialists.
Hartzog expanded the curriculum with more industrialization skills such as
foundry work, agriculture studies and mechanics. In 1902 a large student
walkout over the use of rigid military discipline escalated tensions between
students and faculty forcing Hartzog to resign. Patrick Mell succeeded Hartzog
from 1902 to 1910.[14]

Following the resignation of Mell in 1910 former Clemson Tigers football coach
Walter Riggs became president of Clemson from 1910 to 1924.[15] The
Holtzendorff Hall, originally the Holzendorff YMCA, was built in 1914 designed
by Rudolph E. Lee of the first graduating class of Clemson in 1896. In 1915
Riggs Field was dedicated after Walter Riggs and is the Clemson Tigers men's
soccer home field. During World War I enrollment in Clemson declined. In 1917
Clemson formed a Reserve Officers' Training Corps and in 1918 a Student Army
Training Corps was formed. Effects of World War I made Clemson hire the first
women faculty due to changes in faculty.[16] Riggs accepted a six-month army
educational commission in 1919 overseas in France leaving Samuel Earle as
acting president. On March 10, 1920 a large walkout occurred protesting unfair
"prison camp" style military discipline. The 1920 walkout led to the creation
of a Department of Student Affairs. On January 22, 1924 Riggs died on a
business trip to Washington, D.C. leaving Earle the acting president. In
October 1924 another walkout of around 500 students occurred when Earle
rejected their demands of better food and the dismissal of mess officer
Harcombe and the reinstatement of their senior class president. The 1924
walkout resulted in 23 students dismissed and 112 suspended.

On April 1, 1925 a fire destroyed the interior of the agricultural building
and with it many research projects and an agricultural museum. The exterior of
the building survived, leading to the construction of Sikes Hall to hold the
library from Tillman Hall. On May 27, 1926 Mechanical Hall was destroyed in a
fire. Present-day Freeman Hall, built in 1926, was the reconstructed shop
building. In 1928 Riggs Hall was established in honor of Walter Riggs.[17]
President Enoch Sikes increased student enrollment by over 1,000 students and
expanded the degree programs with an addition of the first graduate degree.
The Department of Arts and Sciences was formed in 1926 with the addition of
modern languages programs. Programs at Clemson were reorganized into six
schools of agriculture, chemistry, engineering, general science, textiles, and
vocational studies. In 1927 Clemson received accreditation from the
Association of Secondary Schools and Colleges of the Southern States.

During The Great Depression student enrollment and income declined. The New
Deal brought needed construction to campus under the Works Progress
Administration with new dormitories to relieve the housing shortages. Long
Hall, Sirrine Hall, and 29,625 acres of privately owned farmland was acquired
by Clemson through federal funding. Agricultural engineers of Clemson
diversified with the Clemson Agricultural Extension to educate farmers on soil
conservation and crop storage techniques during The Great Depression. Robert
Poole became the first Clemson alumnus to be president in 1940. On September
19, 1942 Memorial Stadium was formally opened as the new stadium for the
Clemson Tigers football team who previously played on Riggs Field since
1915.[18]

During World War II more than 6,500 students were sent overseas in the
military. As a result of the Clemson ROTC, around 5,850 were commissioned
officers. The class of 1943 had a historical low of 343 graduates.[19] By the
end of the war, 376 Clemson students had been killed in it.

In 1955 Clemson underwent a major restructuring and was transformed into
"civilian" status for students. It began admitting white women; the university
was still segregated.[20] In 1963, the school admitted its first African-
American student, Harvey Gantt, who later was elected as mayor of Charlotte,
North Carolina.[21] In 1964, the college was renamed Clemson University, as
the state legislature formally recognized the school's expanded academic
offerings and research pursuits.[22]

In 2015, students protested against Tillman Hall being named for "a powerful
white supremacist". The Board of Trustees voted against renaming the
building.[23]

Admission to Clemson is rated "more selective" by _U.S. News& World
Report_.[24]

For the Class of 2021 (enrolling Fall 2017), Clemson received 26,242
applications and accepted 12,381 (47.18%), with 3,448 enrolling.[25] The
middle 50% range of SAT scores for enrolling freshmen was 560-660 for critical
reading and 590-690 for math.[25] The middle 50% ACT composite score range was
27-31.[25] The average high school grade point average (GPA) was 4.0.[25]

The university endeavors to become a "Top 20" public institution, undergoing a
process of enhancing its graduate programs while continuing to emphasize the
quality of the undergraduate experience. It has steadily moved up the rankings
for public universities from 34,[36] to 30,[37] to 27,[38] to 22[39] in 2005,
2006, 2007, and 2008 respectively, according to the _U.S. News& World Report_.
In 2012, _U.S. News & World Report_ ranked Clemson as the 25th top public
school in the U.S.,[40] and in 2015 the ranking improved to a tie for 21st. As
of 2019[update], Clemson is ranked tied for 27th.[9]

However, some have questioned Clemson's efforts to improve its rankings. In
2009, an administrator revealed that "Clemson manipulated class sizes,
artificially boosted faculty salary data and gave rival schools low grades in
the rankings' peer reputation survey", with the goal of manipulating its U.S.
News & World Report ranking. Since then the administrator retracted some of
her statements and the university denied any wrongdoing.[41]

The renowned economist Robert Tollison joined the Clemson faculty in August
2008. As part of its push to enhance graduate-level education, several new
Ph.D. programs have been created including interdisciplinary doctoral programs
in Rhetorics, Communication, and Information Design (RCID), and Planning,
Design, and the Built Environment (formerly Environmental Design and
Planning). Also noteworthy is a new master's degree in historic preservation,
jointly offered in collaboration with the College of Charleston.

The university is home to the Clemson University International Center for
Automotive Research (CU-ICAR).[42] The CU-ICAR is a 250-acre (101 ha)
automotive and motorsports research campus in nearby Greenville, South
Carolina. The department of Automotive Engineering was ranked 10th in the
world in 2015.[43] ICAR will include a graduate school offering master's and
doctoral degrees in automotive engineering, and offering programs focused on
systems integration. The campus also includes an Information Technology
Research Center being developed by BMW. BMW, Microsoft, IBM, Bosch, The Timken
Company and Michelin are all major corporate partners of the CU-ICAR. Private-
sector companies that have committed to establishing offices and/or facilities
on the campus include the Society of Automotive Engineers and Timken. Plans
for the campus also include a full-scale, four-vehicle capacity rolling-road
model wind tunnel.

In 2004 the Restoration Institute was founded. Its mission is to "advance
knowledge in integrative approaches to the restoration of historic,
ecological, and urban infrastructure resources." The institute is in North
Charleston and subsume the Hunley Commission that is undertaking the
stabilization of the _H.L. Hunley_, the world's first submarine to sink a
ship. As of 2013[update], the institute is constructing a 7.5MW and a 15MW
wind turbine test facility for $100 million, to open on November 21.[44][45]

In 2016, Clemson announced a new partnership with Siemens, including a grant
with a total value of $357,224,294. This grant is the largest in the school's
history. Through it, students in Clemson's College of Engineering, Computing
and Applied Sciences will have access to a variety of new software.[46]

In 2011, The Princeton Review ranked Clemson 1st for town-gown relations are
great, 2nd for happiest students, 2nd for jock schools, 3rd for everyone plays
intramural sports, 8th for students pack the stadiums, and 9th for best career
services.[47]

In 2012, SmartMoney named Clemson University as 7th best salary returns on
tuition.[48]

In 2012, U.S. News ranked Clemson University 3rd for having the most financial
resources per student. $26,293 was spent on the average student at Clemson
University.[49]

In 2015, Clemson University broke ground on the Zucker Family Graduate
Education Center in the City of North Charleston. The 70,000 sq.ft. facility
is estimated to cost more than $22 million.[50]

In 2016, The Princeton Review ranked Clemson University number one in three
categories: Student Career Services, Town-Gown Relations, and Students pack
the stadium.[51]

In July 1955, the four schools that made up Clemson ― Agriculture, Arts &
Sciences, Engineering and Textiles ― were transformed into nine colleges:
Architecture, Arts and Sciences, Liberal Arts, Sciences, Commerce and
Industry, Education, Engineering, Forestry and Recreation Resources, and
Nursing.[52] This structure was used by the university until 1995 when the
university's nine colleges were condensed into five: Agriculture, Forestry,
and Life Sciences; Architecture, Arts, and Humanities; Business and Behavioral
Science; Engineering and Science; Health, Education, and Human
Development.[53] As of 14 July 2014[update], the Eugene T. Moore School of
Education broke off from the College of Health, Education, and Human
development, thus becoming the sixth college.[54]

An academic reorganization effective July 1, 2016 created seven new colleges:
College of Agriculture, Forestry and Life Sciences; College of Architecture,
Arts and Humanities; College of Behavioral, Social and Health Sciences;
College of Business; College of Education (including the Eugene T. Moore
School of Education); College of Engineering, Computing and Applied Sciences;
and College of Science.[55]

The College of Agriculture, Forestry and Life Sciences (CAFLS) supports
Clemson University's land-grant mission to provide education, research and
service to the public. CAFLS faculty members teach major subjects and core
curricula while preparing students to be leaders, creative thinkers, and
communicators. Emphasis is placed on engaging students in research,
internships/coops, study abroad, and service learning. CAFLS research is
focused on the sustainability of agriculture, forests, and natural resources;
food and packaging systems to ensure a healthy and safe food supply; and
biomedical sciences to improve human and non-human health.[56]

The College of Architecture, Arts, and Humanities (CAAH) contains three
schools: the School of the Arts, the School of Design and Building, and the
School of the Humanities. Within these schools are ten departments: Art,
Architecture, Construction Science and Management, English, History, Landscape
Architecture, Languages, Performing Arts, Philosophy and Religion, and
Planning, Development,and Restoration.[57] One of the departments of the
college, the School of Architecture, was ranked as the No. 16 graduate school
for architecture in the country by Design Intelligence.[58] The Brooks Center
serves as performing arts venue for the college.[59]

The College of Business is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate
Schools of Business.

The College of Engineering, Computing and Applied Sciences specializes in
engineering as well as the physical sciences such as physics and chemistry.
Inspired by Thomas Green Clemson's dream to create a "high seminary of
learning to benefit the agricultural and mechanical arts," engineering and
sciences have been an integral part of the university's development. Since the
first degrees were granted in 1896, Clemson engineers and scientists have made
significant contributions to South Carolina, the nation and the world.

CoES was formed in 1995, joining the engineering disciplines with the
chemistry, computer science, geological science, mathematical science, and
physics and astronomy departments.[60]

The College of Health and Human Development focuses on public health sciences,
nursing, education, and parks, recreation and tourism management.[61]

Calhoun Honors College was established in 1962. It focuses on education for
highly motivated, academically talented students. Entrance to the college is
very competitive, with only 250 incoming freshmen accepted each year with an
average SAT score of 1400 or higher and finished in the top 3% of their high
school graduating class.[62]

The College of Education is Clemson's newest college. It is centered in the
famous Tillman Hall. The college has some 600 undergraduate students, and 600
graduate students, with the mission to embrace the diverse faculty, staff, and
students and providing them with a diverse set of experiences. The COE also
houses the Call Me MISTER Program and the Moore Scholars.[63]

The Graduate School offers more than 100 graduate degree programs in 85
disciplines on the college's main campus and at sites such as Clemson at the
Falls,[ _where?_ ] the Clemson University International Center for Automotive
Research[ _where?_ ] and the Clemson Architecture Center[ _where?_ ] as well
as some online/distance-learning programs. Many of the graduate programs are
highly ranked nationally, and the school offers several unique
interdisciplinary programs.[64]

The Clemson University International Center for Automotive Research (CU-ICAR)
was established in 2013 in Greenville as a seminary for automotive research
and innovation. The center is a collaboration with BMW.[65]

In addition to their varsity programs, Clemson offers a wide variety of
intramural sports:[66]

The university's fraternities and sororities system (or Greek system) is
somewhat different from other large universities in the southern U.S. in that
there are no Greek houses on campus, as interfraternity activity did not begin
until 1970, following the abolishing of the military cadre requirements at the
university. There are residence halls designated for fraternities and
sororities, but there are no traditional Greek houses on campus. However,
there are a few fraternity houses off campus near the college. The Fraternity
Quad on campus (consisting of seven fraternity and sorority halls) is
certified by the U.S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) program. The remaining sororities' on-campus
housing is on the other end of campus, in what is commonly referred to as "the
horseshoe," in Smith and Barnett Halls.

The College Panhellenic Council Chapters at Clemson University include Alpha
Phi, Alpha Chi Omega, Alpha Delta Pi, Chi Omega, Delta Delta Delta, Delta
Zeta, Gamma Phi Beta, Kappa Alpha Theta, Kappa Delta, Kappa Kappa Gamma, Pi
Beta Phi, Sigma Kappa, and Zeta Tau Alpha.[67] The Interfraternity Council
Chapters include Alpha Gamma Rho, Alpha Sigma Phi, Alpha Tau Omega, Beta Theta
Pi, Beta Upsilon Chi, Chi Phi, Delta Chi, Delta Tau Delta, FarmHouse, Kappa
Alpha Order, Kappa Sigma, Pi Kappa Phi, Phi Gamma Delta, Phi Delta Theta, Phi
Sigma Kappa, Sigma Nu, Theta Chi, Tau Kappa Epsilon, Psi Upsilon, and
Triangle.[68]

As of the fall 2017 semester there are twenty IFC Fraternities, thirteen NPC
Sororities, eight NPHC Chapters, and four MGC Chapters, which make up
approximately 23 percent of the undergraduate student body.

In 2017 15% of men and 31% of women were involved in Greek life, out of 19,825
students.[69] While the required GPA to join Greek life is 2.7, the mean GPA
of each sorority was above the all-university mean.[70]

Although the university became a coeducational civilian institution in 1955,
it still maintains an active military presence. Cadets still participate
during home football games, during which cadets hold the ropes as the team
enters from the Hill, and they complete pushups for every Clemson point
scored, just as the Tiger does.

The university is home to detachments for U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force Reserve
Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) as well as a host school for the U.S. Marine
Corps PLC program adjacent to the Semper Fi Society.

In addition to students from the university, these organizations also serve
students from Anderson University, Southern Wesleyan University, and Tri-
County Technical College. The following organizations are present among the
military personnel at Clemson:[71]

The university's AAS squadron was selected to be home of Arnold Air Society's
National Headquarters for the 2005–2006 year, and again for the 2006–2007
year. This is the first time in AAS's history that any university has served
as national headquarters two years in a row.[72] The squadron again serves as
national headquarters for the 2015-16 school year.

The C-4 Pershing Rifles have won the national society's drill meet nine times:
1999, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2011, and 2017.[72] Company C-4 also
performs colorguards, twenty-one-gun salutes, exhibition-drill performances,
and POW/MIA ceremonies. Company C-4 performs colorguard performance at the
university's home football games. In addition to the C-4 drill company, the
university is the former home of the 4th Regimental Headquarters (4RHQ), the
National Headquarters for the Junior ROTC level of Pershing Rifles
(BlackJacks) and the Co-ed Auxiliary for Pershing Rifles (CAPeRs).

Its Air Force ROTC Detachment 770 "Flyin' Tigers" was selected as the No. 1
"medium-sized" Air Force ROTC detachment in the nation for 2006 (the "High
Flight" and "Right of Line" awards), No. 1 Detachment in the "Southeast" in
2006 ("medium-sized") and 2007 ("large-sized"), and No. 1 in the state of
South Carolina (out of three—University of South Carolina and The Citadel) for
three consecutive years (2005, 2006 and 2007).

The university has also developed a group of Marines and Marine Officer
Candidates within an organization called the Semper Fi Society. The society is
not associated with the ROTC, but can lead to a commission into the U.S.
Marine Corps via the Platoon Leaders Course program.

Clemson University has seven completely student-run media outlets. These
organizations operate under Tiger Media, the university's student media
department, and are each on the third floor of the Hendrix Student Center.
These include _The Tiger_, _The Tiger Town Observer_ , Tigervision, _TAPS
Yearbook_ , _The Pendulum_ , _The Chronicle_ , and WSBF-FM.[73]

Founded in 1907, _The Tiger_ is the oldest student-run newspaper in South
Carolina. _The Tiger_ publishes local and university related news pieces.
Additionally, the paper publishes opinion articles on general and national
issues, lifestyle articles on topics such as food, sex, and music. With sports
being a major part of Clemson University's culture and events, _The Tiger_
also contains a large sports section focusing on football, basketball,
baseball, and soccer. _The Tiger_ is published weekly, on Mondays, and
maintains a staff of 20 senior members and 75 junior staff members.[74]

_The Tiger Town Observer_ is a conservative news magazine that focuses on
university politics. The magazine identifies itself as a "traditionally
conservative" news source and lists its political values as liberty,
transparency, lifelong learning, free market and charity.[75]

Tigervision, Clemson's student-run TV station, broadcasts on channel 88 on the
university's campus cable network. The station was created in 1994 under the
name Clemson Cable Network by students at WSBF-FM who were interested in
television production. The station aired a variety of student created content
as well as recently released movies via a licensing agreement. By 2006, after
experiencing a decline in membership and viewers, CCN was no longer
consistently producing content and fell into relative obscurity. However, in
2007, CCN was reorganized into Clemson Television and began to produce student
comedy shows as well as airing public domain films. As content quality began
to increase, so did membership. In 2014, CTV was renamed Tigervision to
coincide with its switch to high definition broadcasting.[76]

_TAPS Yearbook_ was established in 1907 after members of the Clemson College
Chronicle, the literary arts magazine at the time, wanted to publish a new
book printed annually. It is named after the song "Taps", which was played
each night when cadets went to bed during the college's time as a military
school. Each edition of _TAPS_ contains student portraits, information on
student organizations, and reviews of the past year's events.[77] In 2017,
_TAPS_ announced the end of the 2017-18 academic year would mark the final
edition of the yearbook. Its student media group will replace it with a
quarterly interest magazine beginning in fall 2018.[78]

WSBF-FM was founded in 1958 and made its first broadcast on April 1, 1960. In
the beginning, WSBF's content was mostly agriculture education shows and
classical music. By the mid-1960s, the station began to air sports programs
such as _The Frank Howard Show_ along with news. The station would eventually
shift to a "progressive" format where it focused on new, up-and-coming
contemporary music groups. During the 1980s, the formet would shift gradually
changed to the station's current "alternative" format. WSBF plays a variety
genres including jazz, rap, punk, rock, and folk focusing on independent
artists. The station broadcasts to the Clemson area and upstate South Carolina
on 88.1 FM as well as online.[79]

_The Chronicle_ is a literary art magazine that publishes biannually. It was
founded in 1897 and prints student created content ranging from poetry, short
stories, photography, and drawings.[80]

_The Pendulum_ is a student-run international affairs magazine. It was
established in 2014 and officially joined Tiger Media the following year. It
publishes twice a year during the fall and focuses on international politics,
economics, and global affairs. _The Pendulum_ often takes these topics and
discusses how they affect students and the Clemson community.[81]

The Tiger paw became the official logo for Clemson University in 1970, in
place of the previous tiger logo. The change was inspired by President Robert
Edwards to "upgrade the image of the university." The Tiger Paw logo was
introduced at a press conference on July 21, 1970. It was created by John
Antonio and developed by Helen Weaver of Henderson Advertising in Greenville,
South Carolina, from a mold of a Bengal tiger sent to the agency by the Field
Museum of Natural History in Chicago. The paw is now used on all athletic
teams and collegiate documents. The tiger paw is also painted on surfaces
throughout campus and on highways leading to the campus.[82]

Every year Clemson students have the opportunity to attend Homecoming and
Tigerama. The Clemson Homecoming tradition began in 1914 and has been held
annually at Clemson University ever since. During homecoming week, various
student organizations design and build Homecoming floats on Bowman Field. The
floats are then revealed on the Saturday of the football game and judged by a
select panel. Since 1957, Clemson has held "Tigerama" on the Friday night of
homecoming week. Tigerama is one of the nation's largest student-run-pep
rallies, averaging about 40,000 people. This Clemson event includes the
crowning of Miss Homecoming, skits by various academic organizations, as well
as a fireworks show.[83] [84]

Clemson University's Welcome Back Festival is held every year, on College
Avenue in downtown Clemson, on the Monday after university housing opens. At
the festival surrounding stores, businesses, and restaurants provide free
gifts, merchandise, and samples to new and returning students.[85]
Performances are also held in the downtown area throughout the event,
featuring various local artists and bands.[86] The festival is sponsored by
the Clemson Student Alumni Council, and the money raised benefits the Student
Alumni Council Endowment Scholarship Fund, which has raised more than $38,000
for the scholarship fund.[87] Over 10,000 students attended the 24th Annual
Welcome Back Festival on August 20, 2012.[88]

Tiger Prowl is held on either the Monday or Tuesday after university housing
opens, on Bowman Field and a portion of Highway 93 on Clemson's campus. More
than 400 registered student organizations attend Tiger Prowl, including
organizations in volunteer and service, recreational activities, and Greek
life.[89]

The First Friday Parade has been held on the Friday before the first home
football game every year since 1974. The parade includes fraternities,
sororities, the Clemson marching band, the university President, as well as
many other student organizations. The parade route travels through portions of
Highway 93 and Main Street and concludes at the university's amphitheatre,
where the first pep rally of the year is held. In 1985, the parade had its
highest attendance, when accompanying CBS commentators were the Grand
Marshalls.[83][85]

Spirit Blitz Week is annually held a week before a prominent football game.
The Spirit Blitz Week tradition originated in the 1980s, and encourages
students to wear orange during the entire week and promotes athletic events
throughout the week. It also includes the Spirit Blitz Pep Rally, which is
held during any available day of the week before the football game.[90]

A university tradition has been in place, since September 24, 1977, for the
school's fans to spend two-dollar bills on trips to away football games. The
tradition began when Clemson played against Georgia Tech "for the last time",
as Georgia Tech did not wish to travel to Clemson for future football games.
Of the seventeen games played between Georgia Tech and Clemson between 1953
and 1977, only once, in 1974, did the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets come to
Memorial Stadium. In Atlanta, Georgia, Clemson fans purchased items with two-
dollar bills stamped with "Tiger Paws" to show how they contributed to the
local economy, which began the tradition. The tradition became very popular in
the 1980s and 1990s.[91][ _unreliable source?_ ][92]

The Clemson University alma mater originated in the 1910s after a group of
Clemson ROTC cadets in May 1918 was asked to sing the school's song at a
gathering of ROTC cadets in Plattsburg, New York; they were unable to do so,
as Clemson had no song at the time. One of the cadets in attendance, A.C.
Corcoran of Charleston, South Carolina, decided to remedy the situation and
wrote the words to the alma mater and set them to Annie Lisle, which was the
melody of Cornell University's alma mater, as well as many others. The words
were later officially accepted by the then-named Clemson Agricultural College
as the alma mater and was first performed by the Clemson Glee Club on February
17, 1919.[93]

In 1947 the club "Tiger Brotherhood" decided that, rather than continue
borrowing another school's melody, the university should compose its own. As a
result, the Tiger Brotherhood sponsored a contest to have Clemson students
compose a unique melody. On May 5, 1947, Clemson University's school newspaper
"The Tiger" announced Robert E. Farmer of Anderson, South Carolina, a member
of the glee club at the time, as the winner. Farmer's melody was slightly
altered in 1970, but was restored to its original tune in 2009.[93]

The university's fight song is the jazz standard, the "Tiger Rag".[94]

During home football games, after Clemson scores a touchdown, the Clemson
tiger mascot performs push-ups equal in number to the number of points Clemson
has scored at the time. The Tiger pushup tradition began in 1978 by the Tiger
mascot at the time - Zack Mills. The Tiger mascot outfit weighs 45 pounds,
with the head itself weighing 20 pounds.[95]

The annual Ring Ball, organized by the Clemson Undergraduate Student
Government and Student Alumni Council, is a nighttime celebration on the
Carillon Gardens for graduating seniors as they receive their Clemson rings.
The tradition began in the 1930s but was canceled in 1936 due to a flu
epidemic. The tradition was reestablished on April 26, 2013.[96]

Clemson University and the University of South Carolina host a blood drive
competition to determine who can donate the most blood during a week before
their annual rivalry football game. Since the tradition began in 1985, more
than 90,000 pints of blood have been donated.[85] The blood drive is sponsored
by the Alpha Phi Omega National Service Fraternity, and donations at Clemson
Benefit The Blood Connection and the AnMed Blood Center.[97]

Clemson University teams are known as the Tigers. They compete as a member of
the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I level (Football
Bowl Subdivision (FBS) sub-level for football), primarily competing in the
Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) for all sports since the 1953-54 season. Men's
sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, soccer,
tennis and track & field; while women's sports include basketball, cross
country, golf, rowing, soccer, diving, tennis, track & field and volleyball.

The most-prominent athletics facilities on campus are Memorial Stadium,
Littlejohn Coliseum, Doug Kingsmore Stadium, Historic Riggs Field, and Fike
Recreation Center. Clemson has won six national championships including three
in football (1981, 2016 and 2018), two in men's soccer (1984 and 1987), and
men's golf (2003).

Memorial Stadium

Littlejohn Coliseum

Doug Kingsmore Stadium

Riggs Field

Fike Recreation Center

Jervey Athletic Center

Clemson University operates with the Clemson University Police Department and
the Clemson University Fire & EMS, for public safety needs. Both departments
are staffed 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The Clemson University Fire & EMS
has one station, at 1521 Perimeter Road. The Police Department is at the West
End Zone of Frank Howard Field.

**Notes**

