**CNN International** ( **CNNI** , on-air branding simply as **CNN** ) is an
international pay television channel that is operated by CNN. CNN
International carries news-related programming worldwide; it cooperates with
parent network CNN's national and international news bureaus. Unlike its
sister channel, CNN, a US-only subscription service which is mostly broadcast
from CNN studios in New York City and Atlanta, CNN International is carried on
a variety of TV platforms across the world, and mostly broadcast from studios
outside the US, in London, Mumbai, Hong Kong and Abu Dhabi. In some countries,
it is available as a free-to-air network. The service is aimed at the overseas
market, similar to BBC World News, France 24, DW, RT, CGTN, NHK World or Al
Jazeera.

CNN International, in large part a result of Ted Turner's globalization
ideals, began broadcasting on September 1, 1985, at first primarily
broadcasting to American business travelers in hotels. The first studio for
CNNI was at CNN's original studio building known as Techwood, home at that
time to all of Turner Broadcasting System's channels. Today, it is home to the
Turner Studios complex that houses the entertainment channels. Other early
studios in Atlanta were tucked away in various corners of the CNN Center, and
the newsroom lacked even a digital clock. The vast majority of the network's
programming originally consisted of simulcasts of the two domestic CNN
channels (CNN/US and Headline News). In 1990, however, the amount of news
programming produced by CNNI especially for international viewers increased
significantly. A new newsroom and studio complex was built in 1994, as CNN
decided to compete against BBC World Service Television's news programming.
CNNI emerged as an internationally oriented news channel, with staff members
of various national backgrounds, even though some accusations of a pro-U.S.
editorial bias persist. CNN International was awarded the Liberty Medal on
July 4, 1997. Ted Turner, in accepting the medal on behalf of the network,
said: "My idea was, we're just going to give people the facts... We didn't
have to show liberty and democracy as good, and show socialism or
totalitarianism as bad. If we just showed them both the way they were ...
clearly everybody's going to choose liberty and democracy."[3]

In 1995, creative director Morgan Almeida defined a progressive rebranding
strategy, to target CNNI's diverse global market, making the on-air look less
overtly American and with a cleaner, simpler "international" aesthetic going
forward. The word "International" in the channel's logo was replaced with a
globe, and the new branding featured numerous international locations filmed
in time-lapse, channel idents created in CGI with Velvet Design in Munich, and
a news brand designed with The Attik in New York.[4]

The network undertook another major rebranding effort in 2006 overseen by Mark
Wright and London agency Kemistry. The ticker was replaced by a flipper, on-
screen graphics were more unified and from October 2007 until August 2008, new
studios were progressively rolled out. However, on January 1, 2009, CNN
International adopted the "lower-thirds" that CNN/US had introduced a month
earlier which were inspired by the clean modern design of the CNNI rebrand
efforts.

In the U.S., CNNI North America was distributed overnight and on weekends over
the CNNfn financial channel, until that channel's demise in December 2004. It
is now available as a standalone, full-time channel, usually as part of high-
tier packages of subscription providers including Time Warner Cable, AT&T
U-Verse, Verizon FiOS and Cox Communications.

Throughout January until September 2009, CNN International adapted more
programs that became geared towards a primetime European audience with a few
titled after CNN International personalities, most notably the interview
program Amanpour. On September 21, 2009, the channel launched a new tagline
"Go Beyond Borders", along with a new logo, and consolidated its general
newscasts ( _World News_ , _CNN Today_ , _World News Asia_ , _World News
Europe_ and _Your World Today_ ) into a single newscast entitled _World
Report_.

The slogan "Go Beyond Borders" emphasizes the international perspective that
gives the information in this string and the plurality of the audiences. With
this tagline, CNN also refers to the various platforms to disseminate their
contents. The new image was created by the creativity and marketing
department, and agency CNN Tooth & Nail. An important element of the rebrand
was a new evening program that adds the broadcast of programs _Amanpour_ and
_World One_. The makeover of CNN International has subject to a lot of
criticism on both the new prime time lineup and the redesigned graphics.

On January 11, 2009, in a bid to compete directly with Al Jazeera English, the
network launched a new production center: CNN Abu Dhabi, based in the United
Arab Emirates. Then, CNN International adapted half-hour shows in its schedule
with a new evening prime program for Middle East viewers, _Prism_.

In 2010, CNN International launched new programs for its evening lineup in
order to improve its schedule. In 2011, programs from CNN U.S. were added to
the CNN International schedule, including the talk program _Piers Morgan Live_
which was later cancelled and replaced with CNN Tonight hosted by Don Lemon.

"This is CNN" represents CNN International's rebrand with new sets and output
in full 16:9 high definition. The "This is CNN" slogan is also used on its
sister network CNN in USA. The managing director of CNN International from
2003 to May 2019 was Tony Maddox.[5]

In 2019, CNN International announced it was reducing its programming and staff
based in London to reduce costs, with CNNI losing $10 million per year.[6]

There are six variants of CNN International:

The schedules of the different regional versions no longer differ
significantly from each other, but there are still minor variations such as
weather updates and show airtimes - notably _Amanpour_ , which also airs at
22.00 HK time in Asia in lieu of the first half-hour of International Desk,
and 23.00 CET in Europe in addition to its original airtime.

CNN has reported that its broadcast agreement in mainland China includes an
arrangement that its signal must pass through a Chinese-controlled satellite.
With this method of transmission, Chinese authorities have been able to black
out CNNI segments at will. CNN has also said that its broadcasts are not
widely available in mainland China, but rather only in certain diplomatic
compounds, hotels, and apartment blocks.[7]

In June 2015, CNN International was made available online in the United States
for CNN/U.S subscribers on participating television providers through the
CNNgo service.[8]

Although dramatically scaled down since its early days, CNNI currently draws
from the feed of the main CNN channel for all editions of _The Lead with Jake
Tapper_ , _Anderson Cooper 360°_ , _Cuomo Primetime_ , the first hour of _CNN
Tonight_ and _Early Start_ , the first two hours of the weekday edition of
_New Day_ , the Sunday edition of _Inside Politics_ , _State of the Union_ ,
_Fareed Zakaria GPS_ , _Reliable Sources_ , _Smerconish_ and some _CNN Special
Investigations Unit_ documentaries. The ticker and timepiece of CNN/US are
replaced by those of CNNI, although CNN/US's red logo on a white field is
retained in the on-screen graphic (rather than replaced by CNNI's white logo
on a red field), signifying CNN/US as the originating source.

CNNI also simulcasts CNN/U.S. newscasts whenever major events happen in the
United States or around the world. Examples include the death and funeral of
Ronald Reagan, the crash of Continental Airlines Flight 3407 in the Buffalo
suburb of Clarence Center, the Hudson River plane landing, the attempted
Christmas Day bombing of flight 253 and the death and memorial service of
Michael Jackson as well as scheduled broadcasts such as _New Year's Eve Live_
and _Election Night in America_.

Likewise, CNN/U.S. occasionally turns to CNNI newscasts, primarily when major
international news breaks during overnight hours in the U.S. A notable case
was during the death of Pope John Paul II and the aftermath of the London
Underground bombings of July 7, 2005. CNN/U.S. simulcast CNNI coverage of the
death of Pakistan's former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto on the night after
her assassination took place. Simulcasts also happened from November 27 to 29,
2008, due to the terror attacks in Mumbai, India, on January 4, 2009, when
Israel launched strikes into Gaza, and during the early hours of January 14,
2010, due to the earthquake in Haiti.

From 2005 until early 2008, CNNI's _Your World Today_ aired on CNN/U.S.[9]
during the 12–1 p.m. ET timeslot. That program was initially pre-empted by
_Issue #1_ , a program dealing in the American economic, financial, and
housing sectors as part of the lead-up to the 2008 U.S. presidential election,
and permanently replaced by another hour of _CNN Newsroom_ in September 2008.

During the Atlanta tornado outbreak in March 2008, CNN/U.S. and CNNI
simulcasted coverage after _Anderson Cooper 360°_ ended. That coverage ended
around 12:36 a.m. EDT[10] and the channels resumed their normal programming.
Furthermore, the next day, with storms impending, CNN/U.S. had to move onto
CNNI's U.S. news set and weather center to avoid water from possible flooding
during the storms.

On January 17, 2011, CNN/U.S. dropped its early morning rebroadcasts of
_ParkerSpitzer_ and _Anderson Cooper 360°_ during the 4–6 a.m. ET time period,
and began to simulcast _World Business Today_ and _World One_ from CNNI in
those slots. Both newscasts are the only programs broadcast entirely in 4:3
fullscreen frames on CNN/U.S.' standard-definition and high-definition feeds
(the SD feed of CNN/US switched to a widescreen letterbox screen format on
January 11, 2011). _World One_ was dropped from CNN/U.S. just a few months
later to allow the addition of an extra hour of _American Morning_ which has
been replaced with _Early Start_.

As of August 2014, following the unrest in Ferguson, Missouri, a permanent
simulcast of CNNI's block of _Newsroom_ with Rosemary Church and Errol Barnett
was added to the late-night lineup of CNN/U.S., serving as a lead-in to _Early
Start_. In late 2015, John Vause and anchor Isha Sesay began to anchor a two-
hour block of the simulcast from CNN studios in Los Angeles.[11]

In 2017, CNN International began simulcasting the first hour of the weekday
edition of _New Day_ and on September 10, 2018, _The Lead with Jake Tapper_
started to be simulcast on CNNI.[12]

In 2019, CNN International announced it was reducing its programming and staff
based in London to reduce costs.[13] Consequently, an additional two hours of
simulcasts with CNN/U.S. on weekdays was added - the first hour of _Early
Start_ and the second hour of _New Day_. Consequently, CNNI now broadcasts
CNN/U.S. for seven hours each weekday. Weekend simulcasts of CNN USA were not
increased.

_All news programming is replaced by features, except for the following:_

**CNN International HD** is the high definition simulcast feed of the channel
broadcasting at 1920x1080i, which was launched in September 2012. Prior to
June 3, 2013, only programming from CNN US were available natively in HD,
while shows made for CNN International were produced in 4:3 576i. In February
2013, the European SD feed of CNN International began broadcasting in
widescreen by downscaling the HD feed, which resulted in all 4:3-native
programming being broadcast in pillarbox until the June 3 switchover,
finalising on June 17 of the same year, when the switchover was completed.

In late 2010, the American CNN channel became available in HD to viewers in
Japan under the name **CNN HD**. The CNN U.S. domestic version (both SD and
HD) is also available on Greater China-based satellite service DishHD
(subsidiary of Dish Network in U.S.).

On June 28, 2016, CNN International HD was launched for Sky customers in the
UK, on channel 506 or 579, making the next news channel launch in the 600s, as
it is next to the GOD Channel.

CNN debuted its news website CNN.com (initially an experiment known as _CNN
Interactive_ ) on August 30, 1995. The site attracted growing interest over
its first decade and is now one of the most popular news websites in the
world. The widespread growth of blogs, social media and user-generated content
have influenced the site, and blogs in particular have focused CNN's
previously scattershot online offerings, most noticeably in the development
and launch of CNN Pipeline in late 2005. In April 2009, CNN.com ranked third
place among online global news sites in unique users in the U.S. according to
Nielsen/NetRatings; with an increase of 11% over the previous year.

CNN Pipeline was the name of a paid subscription service, its corresponding
website, and a content delivery client that provided streams of live video
from up to four sources (or "pipes"), on-demand access to CNN stories and
reports, and optional pop-up "news alerts" to computer users. The installable
client was available to users of PCs running Microsoft Windows. There was also
a browser-based "web client" that did not require installation. In July 2007,
the service was discontinued and replaced with a free streaming service.

The now-defunct topical news program _Judy Woodruff's Inside Politics_ was the
first CNN program to feature a round-up of blogs in 2005.[14] Blog coverage
was expanded when _Inside Politics_ was folded into _The Situation Room_. In
2006, CNN launched CNN Exchange and CNN iReport, initiatives designed to
further introduce and centralize the impact of everything from blogging to
citizen journalism within the CNN brand. CNN iReport which features user-
submitted photos and video, has achieved considerable traction, with
increasingly professional-looking reports filed by amateur journalists, many
still in high school or college. The iReport gained more prominence when
observers of the Virginia Tech shootings sent-in first hand photos of what was
going during the shootings.[15]

In early 2008, CNN began maintaining a live streaming broadcast available to
those who receive CNN at home.[16] CNN International is broadcast live, as
part of the RealNetworks SuperPass subscription outside the U.S. CNN also
offers several RSS feeds and podcasts.

On April 18, 2008, CNN.com was targeted by Chinese hackers in retaliation for
the channel's coverage on the 2008 Tibetan unrest. CNN reported that they took
preventative measures after news broke of the impending attack.[17][18] The
company was honored at the 2008 Technology & Engineering Emmy Awards for
development and implementation of an integrated and portable IP-based live,
edit and store-and-forward digital newsgathering system.

On October 24, 2009 CNN launched a new version of the CNN.com website,
revamping it adding a new "sign up" option where users may create their own
user name, a new "CNN Pulse" (beta) feature along with a new red color
theme.[19] However, most of the news archived on the website has been deleted.
CNN also has a channel in the popular video-sharing site YouTube, but its
videos can only be viewed in the United States, a source of criticism among
YouTube users worldwide.[ _citation needed_ ]

In April 2010, CNN announced via Twitter its upcoming food blog called
"Eatocracy," in which it will "cover all news related to food – from recalls
to health issues to culture."[20] CNN had an internet relay chat (IRC) network
at chat.cnn.com. CNN placed a live chat with Benjamin Netanyahu on the network
in 1998.[21]

CNN also maintains a wire service known as CNN Wire.[22]

In parts of the world without a CNN bureau, reports from local affiliate
station the network will be used to file a story.

Former CNN Beijing and Tokyo bureau chief Rebecca MacKinnon described how the
news-gathering priorities of CNN International were skewed to "produce stories
and reports that would be of interest to CNN USA." Nevertheless, Jane Arraf, a
former correspondent who was with the Council on Foreign Relations and later
served as a Middle East-based correspondent for Al Jazeera English, noted that
when she spoke on international affairs, CNN International would usually give
her more airtime than CNN/US. For its own part, former CNN executive Eason
Jordan has defended CNN International's "international" perspective, saying
"No matter what CNN International does, as long as CNN's headquarters is in
the United States people are going to say, well, it's an American service. But
the reality is that it's an international service based in the United States,
and we don't make any apologies about that."[26]

In 2002, Honest Reporting spearheaded a campaign to expose CNN for pro-
Palestinian bias, citing public remarks in which Ted Turner equated
Palestinian suicide bombing with Israeli military strikes.[27] On November 18,
2014, a misleading headline was posted by CNN. Two Palestinian terrorists had
entered a synagogue with knives and a gun, killing four Jewish worshippers and
wounding seven. The headline stated instead that two Palestinian were killed
by Israeli police, thus equating the perpetrators of the massacre of Jews with
the killing of the armed terrorists. The headline failed to mention the four
Jews who were murdered in this 2014 Jerusalem synagogue attack. CNN stated
that the attack occurred at a mosque, when in fact the synagogue was attacked,
compounding the bias.[28][29][30]

CNN is one of the world's largest news organizations, and its international
channel, CNN International is the leading international news channel in terms
of viewer reach.[31][32] Unlike the BBC and its network of reporters and
bureaus, CNN International makes extensive use of affiliated reporters that
are local to, and often directly affected by, the events they are reporting.
The effect is a more immediate, less detached style of on-the-ground coverage.
This has done little to stem criticism, largely from Middle Eastern nations,
that CNN International reports news from a pro-American perspective. This is a
marked contrast to domestic criticisms that often portray CNN as having a
"liberal" or "anti-American" bias.

A Chinese website, anti-cnn.com,[33] has accused CNN and western media in
general of biased reporting against China, with the catchphrase "Don't be so
CNN" catching on in the Chinese mainstream as jokingly meaning "Don't be so
biased". Pictures used by CNN are allegedly edited to have completely
different meanings from the original ones. In addition, the channel was
accused of largely ignoring pro-China voices during the Olympic Torch Relay
debacle in San Francisco.

On July 7, 2010, Octavia Nasr, senior Middle East editor and a CNN journalist
for 20 years, was fired after she expressed admiration on her Twitter account
for a militant Muslim cleric and former Hezbollah leader who had recently
died.[34]

In October 2011, Amber Lyon claimed to the Syrian government news agency SANA
that she had been directed by CNN to report selectively, repetitively, and
falsely in order to sway public opinion in favor of direct American aggression
against Iran and Syria,[35] and that this was common practice under CNN. She
subsequently repeated this claim, addressing the degraded state of
journalistic ethics in an interview[36][ _citation needed_ ] during which she
also discussed the Bahraini episode, suggesting paid-for content was also
taken from Georgia, Kazakhstan, and other states, that the War on Terrorism
had also been employed as a pretext to pre-empt substantive investigative
journalism within the U.S., and that following the Bahrain reporting, her
investigative department had been terminated and "reorganized", and her
severance and employee benefits used as a threat to intimidate and attempt to
purchase her subsequent silence.

Lyon claimed to have met with Tony Maddox, president of CNN International,
twice about this issue in 2011 and had claimed that during the second meeting
she was threatened and intimated to stop speaking on the matter.[37] CNN
issued a detailed response to Lyon's claims about its coverage of Bahrain.[38]

Lyon also claimed on the Russian news channel RT that CNN reporters, headed by
Maddox, have been instructed to over-cover Iran as a form of propaganda, and
that CNN International has been paid by the Bahraini government to produce and
air news segments intentionally painting them in a positive light.[ _citation
needed_ ]

**1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  
7**

NBC  
_Wall Street Journal_  
Agence France-Presse  
MSNBC  
Bloomberg BNA  
_Washington Examiner_  
Univision

Fox News  
CBS Radio  
AP Radio  
Foreign Pool  
_Time_  
Yahoo! News  
_Dallas Morning News_

CBS News  
Bloomberg  
McClatchy  
_Washington Times_  
Sirius XM  
Salem Radio  
_Globe_/ _Roll Call_

AP  
NPR  
AURN  
_The Hill_  
Regionals  
Newsmax  
CBN

ABC News  
_Washington Post_  
Politico  
Fox News Radio  
_CSM_/ _NY Post_  
_Daily Mail_  
BBC/OAN

Reuters  
_NY Times_  
_Chicago Tribune_  
VOA  
RealClearPolitics  
_HuffPost_ / _NY Daily News_  
_BuzzFeed_/ _Daily Beast_

CNN  
_USA Today_  
ABC Radio  
_National Journal_  
Al Jazeera/PBS  
Westwood One  
_Financial Times_ / _Guardian_

