**Coleslaw** (from the Dutch term _koolsla_ meaning 'cabbage salad'), also
known as **cole slaw** or **slaw** , is a salad consisting primarily of
finely-shredded raw cabbage[2] with a salad dressing, commonly either
vinaigrette or mayonnaise. Coleslaw prepared with vinaigrette may benefit from
the long lifespan granted by pickling.[3]

The term "coleslaw" arose in the 18th century as an anglicisation of the Dutch
term "koolsla" ("kool" in Dutch sounds like "cole") meaning "cabbage
salad".[4][5] The "cole" part of the word comes from the Latin colis, meaning
"cabbage".

The 1770 recipe book _The Sensible Cook: Dutch Foodways in the Old and New
World_ contains a recipe attributed to the author's Dutch landlady, who mixed
thin strips of cabbage with melted butter, vinegar, and oil. The recipe for
coleslaw as it is most commonly prepared is fairly young, as mayonnaise was
invented during the mid-18th century.

According to _The Joy of Cooking_ (1997), raw cabbage is the only entirely
consistent ingredient in coleslaw; the type of cabbage, dressing, and added
ingredients vary widely. Vinaigrette, mayonnaise, and sour cream based
dressings are all listed; bacon, carrots, bell peppers, pineapple, pickles,
onions, and herbs are specifically mentioned as possible added ingredients.[5]

Coleslaw is generally eaten as a side dish with foods such as fried chicken
and barbecued meats and may be accompanied by French fries or potato salad as
another side dish. It also may be used as a sandwich ingredient, being placed
on barbecue sandwiches, hamburgers, and hot dogs along with chili and hot
mustard. A vinegar-based coleslaw is the signature ingredient to a Primanti
Brothers sandwich. Coleslaw also is used on a variant of the Reuben sandwich,
with coleslaw substituting for the sauerkraut; the sandwich is commonly called
a Rachel to differentiate it from the Reuben.

There are many variations of the recipe, which include the addition of other
ingredients such as red cabbage, pepper, shredded carrots, onion, grated
cheese, pineapple, or apple, mixed with a salad dressing such as mayonnaise or
cream. A variety of seasonings, such as celery seed, may be added. The cabbage
may come in finely minced pieces, shredded strips, or small squares. Other
slaw variants include broccoli slaw, which uses shredded raw broccoli in place
of the cabbage. Cream, sour cream, or buttermilk are also popular additions.
Buttermilk coleslaw is most commonly found in the southern United States.

Traditional German _Krautsalat_ consists of finely shredded cabbage marinated
with oil and vinegar.[ _citation needed_ ] Sometimes onions or apples are
added.[ _citation needed_ ]

Coleslaw with cooked ham and sliced pepper (julienne cut) in Italy is called
_insalata capricciosa_ (capricious salad).[ _citation needed_ ]

Various cabbage-based salads that resemble coleslaw are commonly served as a
side dish with the second course at dinner, next to meat and potatoes. There
is no fixed recipe, but typical ingredients include shredded white cabbage
(red and Chinese cabbage are also not uncommon), finely chopped onions,
shredded carrots, and parsley or dill leaves, with many possible additions.
These are seasoned with salt, black pepper and a pinch of sugar, and tossed
with a dash of oil (typically sunflower or rapeseed) and vinegar, while
mayonnaise-based dressings are uncommon. An alternative, usually served with
fried fish, is made with sauerkraut, squeezed to get rid of excess salty brine
and similarly tossed with carrots, onions, black pepper, sugar and oil.

Any simple salad of that kind, i.e. one made with shredded raw vegetables, is
known as a _surówka_ (Polish: _surowy_ 'raw'). If cabbage is the base
ingredient, it is simply called a _surówka z (kiszonej) kapusty_ , or a
"(soured) cabbage salad". The English name "coleslaw" is mainly associated
with the mayonnaise-dressed cabbage.

In Russia and Ukraine, a salad of fresh shredded cabbage, mixed with carrots,
apples, cranberries etc., is traditionally dressed with unrefined sunflower
oil.[6] The cabbage can be marinated before with vinegar producing _cabbage
provençal_ (Russian: капуста провансаль, tr. _kapusta provansal_ ).[7] A
similar salad is also made of sauerkraut.[6]

In Sweden, a particular type of cabbage salad made with a vinaigrette
consisting of vinegar or acetic acid (vinegar essence), vegetable oil, salt,
and seasonings is classically served with pizza and known as _pizzasallad_
(pizza salad).[8] Recipe adds carrots and leeks and is called _veckosallad_
(week salad) for its notable durability. The term coleslaw is reserved for
cabbage salad with carrots and mayonnaise-based dressing, and is typically
seen as part of the American cuisine.

In the United Kingdom, coleslaw often contains carrot in addition to cabbage,
and is often made with mayonnaise or salad cream. Some variations include
grated cheese such as cheddar, or nuts such as walnuts and dried fruits such
as sultanas or raisins.

In the United States, coleslaw often contains buttermilk, mayonnaise or
mayonnaise substitutes, and carrot, although many regional variations exist,
and recipes incorporating prepared mustard or vinegar without the dairy and
mayonnaise are also common. Barbecue slaw, also known as red slaw, is made
using ketchup and vinegar rather than mayonnaise.[9] It is frequently served
alongside North Carolina barbecue, including Lexington style barbecue, where,
unlike in the rest of the state, a red slaw is the prevailing variety.[10]

  

