The expression **collective behavior** was first used by Franklin Henry
Giddings (1908) and employed later by Robert E. Park and Burgess (1921),
Herbert Blumer (1939), Ralph Turner and Lewis Killian (1957), and Neil Smelser
(1962) to refer to social processes and events which do not reflect existing
social structure (laws, conventions, and institutions), but which emerge in a
"spontaneous" way. Use of the term has been expanded to include reference to
cells, social animals like birds and fish, and insects including ants (Gordon
2014). Collective behavior takes many forms but generally violates societal
norms (Miller 2000; Locher 2002). Collective behavior can be tremendously
destructive, as with riots or mob violence, silly, as with fads, or anywhere
in between. Collective behavior is always driven by group dynamics,
encouraging people to engage in acts they might consider unthinkable under
typical social circumstances (Locher 2002).

Turner and Killian (1957) were the first sociologists to back their
theoretical propositions with visual evidence in the form of photographs and
motion pictures of collective behavior in action. Prior to that sociologists
relied heavily upon eyewitness accounts, which turned out to be far less
reliable than one would hope.

Turner and Killian's approach is based largely upon the arguments of Blumer,
who argued that social "forces" are not really forces. The actor is active: He
creates an interpretation of the acts of others, and acts on the basis of this
interpretation.

Here are some instances of collective behavior: the Los Angeles riot of 1992,
the hula-hoop fad of 1958, the stock market crashes of 1929, and the "phantom
gasser" episodes in Virginia in 1933â€“34 and Mattoon, IL in 1944 (Locher 2002;
Miller 2000). The claim that such diverse episodes all belong to a single
field of inquiry is a theoretical assertion, and not all sociologists would
agree with it. But Blumer and Neil Smelser did agree, as did others,
indicating that the formulation has satisfied some leading sociological
thinkers.

Although there are several other schema that may be used to classify forms of
collective behavior the following four categories from Blumer (1939) are
generally considered useful by most sociologists.

Scholars differ about what classes of social events fall under the rubric of
collective behavior. In fact, the only class of events which all authors
include is crowds. Clark McPhail is one of those who treats crowds and
collective behavior as synonyms. Although some consider McPhail's work
(McPhail 1991) overly simplistic (Locher 2002), his important contribution is
to have gone beyond the speculations of others to carry out pioneering
empirical studies of crowds. He finds them to form an elaborate set of types.

The classic treatment of crowds is Gustave LeBon, _The Crowd: A Study of the
Popular Mind_ (LeBon 1896), in which the author interpreted the crowds of the
French Revolution as irrational reversions to animal emotion, and inferred
from this that such reversion is characteristic of crowds in general. LeBon
believed that crowds somehow induced people to lose their ability to think
rationally and to somehow recover this ability once they had left the crowd.
He speculated, but could not explain how this might occur. Freud expressed a
similar view in _Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego_ (1922). Such
authors have thought that their ideas were confirmed by various kinds of
crowds, one of these being the economic bubble. In Holland, during the tulip
mania (1637), the prices of tulip bulbs rose to astronomical heights. An array
of such crazes and other historical oddities is narrated in Charles MacKay's
_Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds_ (MacKay 1841).

At the University of Chicago, Robert Park and Herbert Blumer agreed with the
speculations of LeBon and other that crowds are indeed emotional. But to them
a crowd is capable of any emotion, not only the negative ones of anger and
fear.

A number of authors modify the common-sense notion of the crowd to include
episodes during which the participants are not assembled in one place but are
dispersed over a large area. Turner and Killian refer to such episodes as
_diffuse_ crowds, examples being Billy Graham's revivals, panics about sexual
perils, witch hunts and Red scares. Their expanded definition of the crowd is
justified if propositions which hold true among compact crowds do so for
diffuse crowds as well.

Some psychologists have claimed that there are three fundamental human
emotions: fear, joy, and anger. Neil Smelser, John Lofland, and others have
proposed three corresponding forms of the crowd: the panic (an expression of
fear), the craze (an expression of joy), and the hostile outburst (an
expression of anger). Each of the three emotions can characterize either a
_compact_ or a _diffuse_ crowd, the result being a scheme of six types of
crowds. Lofland has offered the most explicit discussion of these types.

Boom distinguishes the **crowd** , which expresses a _common emotion_ , from a
**public** , which discusses a _single issue_. Thus, a public is not
equivalent to all of the members of a society. Obviously, this is not the
usual use of the word, "public." To Park and Blumer, there are as many publics
as there are issues. A public comes into being when discussion of an issue
begins, and ceases to be when it reaches a decision on it.

To the crowd and the public Blumer adds a third form of collective behavior,
the **mass.** It differs from both the crowd and the public in that it is
defined not by a form of interaction but by the efforts of those who use the
mass media to address an audience. The first mass medium was printing.

We change intellectual gears when we confront Blumer's final form of
collective behavior, the social movement. He identifies several types of
these, among which are _active_ social movements such as the French Revolution
and _expressive_ ones such as Alcoholics Anonymous. An active movement tries
to change society; an expressive one tries to change its own members.

The social movement is the form of collective behavior which satisfies least
well the first definition of it which was offered at the beginning of this
article. These episodes are less fluid than the other forms, and do not change
as often as other forms do. Furthermore, as can be seen in the history of the
labor movement and many religious sects, a social movement may begin as
collective behavior but over time become firmly established as a social
institution.

For this reason, social movements are often considered a separate field of
sociology. The books and articles about them are far more numerous than the
sum of studies of all the other forms of collective behavior put together.
Social movements are considered in many Wikipedia articles, and an article on
the field of social movements as a whole would be much longer than this essay.

The study of collective behavior spun its wheels for many years, but began to
make progress with the appearance of Turner and Killian's "Collective
Behavior" (1957) and Smelser's _Theory of Collective Behavior_ (1962). Both
books pushed the topic of collective behavior back into the consciousness of
American sociologists and both theories contributed immensely to our
understanding of collective behavior (Locher 2002; Miller 2000). Social
disturbances in the U. S. and elsewhere in the late '60s and early '70s
inspired another surge of interest in crowds and social movements. These
studies presented a number of challenges to the armchair sociology of earlier
students of collective behavior.

Social scientists have developed theories to explain crowd behavior.

