**Combustion** , or **burning** ,[1] is a high-temperature exothermic redox
chemical reaction between a fuel (the reductant) and an oxidant, usually
atmospheric oxygen, that produces oxidized, often gaseous products, in a
mixture termed as smoke. Combustion in a fire produces a flame, and the heat
produced can make combustion self-sustaining. Combustion is often a
complicated sequence of elementary radical reactions. Solid fuels, such as
wood and coal, first undergo endothermic pyrolysis to produce gaseous fuels
whose combustion then supplies the heat required to produce more of them.
Combustion is often hot enough that incandescent light in the form of either
glowing or a flame is produced. A simple example can be seen in the combustion
of hydrogen and oxygen into water vapor, a reaction commonly used to fuel
rocket engines. This reaction releases 242 kJ/mol of heat and reduces the
enthalpy accordingly (at constant temperature and pressure):

Combustion of an organic fuel in air is always exothermic because the double
bond in O2 is much weaker than other double bonds or pairs of single bonds,
and therefore the formation of the stronger bonds in the combustion products
CO  
2 and H  
2O results in the release of energy.[2] The bond energies in the fuel play
only a minor role, since they are similar to those in the combustion products;
e.g., the sum of the bond energies of CH4 is nearly the same as that of CO  
2. The heat of combustion is approximately -418 kJ per mole of O2 used up in the combustion reaction, and can be estimated from the elemental composition of the fuel.[2]

Uncatalyzed combustion in air requires fairly high temperatures. Complete
combustion is stoichiometric with respect to the fuel, where there is no
remaining fuel, and ideally, no remaining oxidant. Thermodynamically, the
chemical equilibrium of combustion in air is overwhelmingly on the side of the
products. However, complete combustion is almost impossible to achieve, since
the chemical equilibrium is not necessarily reached, or may contain unburnt
products such as carbon monoxide, hydrogen and even carbon (soot or ash).
Thus, the produced smoke is usually toxic and contains unburned or partially
oxidized products. Any combustion at high temperatures in atmospheric air,
which is 78 percent nitrogen, will also create small amounts of several
nitrogen oxides, commonly referred to as NO  
_x_ , since the combustion of nitrogen is thermodynamically favored at high,
but not low temperatures. Since combustion is rarely clean, flue gas cleaning
or catalytic converters may be required by law.

Fires occur naturally, ignited by lightning strikes or by volcanic products.
Combustion (fire) was the first controlled chemical reaction discovered by
humans, in the form of campfires and bonfires, and continues to be the main
method to produce energy for humanity. Usually, the fuel is carbon,
hydrocarbons or more complicated mixtures such as wood that contains partially
oxidized hydrocarbons. The thermal energy produced from combustion of either
fossil fuels such as coal or oil, or from renewable fuels such as firewood, is
harvested for diverse uses such as cooking, production of electricity or
industrial or domestic heating. Combustion is also currently the only reaction
used to power rockets. Combustion is also used to destroy (incinerate) waste,
both nonhazardous and hazardous.

Oxidants for combustion have high oxidation potential and include atmospheric
or pure oxygen, chlorine, fluorine, chlorine trifluoride, nitrous oxide and
nitric acid. For instance, hydrogen burns in chlorine to form hydrogen
chloride with the liberation of heat and light characteristic of combustion.
Although usually not catalyzed, combustion can be catalyzed by platinum or
vanadium, as in the contact process.

In complete combustion, the reactant burns in oxygen, and produces a limited
number of products. When a hydrocarbon burns in oxygen, the reaction will
primarily yield carbon dioxide and water. When elements are burned, the
products are primarily the most common oxides. Carbon will yield carbon
dioxide, sulfur will yield sulfur dioxide, and iron will yield iron(III)
oxide. Nitrogen is not considered to be a combustible substance when oxygen is
the oxidant, but small amounts of various nitrogen oxides (commonly designated
NO  
 _x_ species) form when the air is the oxidant.

Combustion is not necessarily favorable to the maximum degree of oxidation,
and it can be temperature-dependent. For example, sulfur trioxide is not
produced quantitatively by the combustion of sulfur. NOx species appear in
significant amounts above about 2,800 °F (1,540 °C), and more is produced at
higher temperatures. The amount of NOx is also a function of oxygen excess.[3]

In most industrial applications and in fires, air is the source of oxygen (O  
2). In the air, each mole of oxygen is mixed with approximately 3.71 mol of
nitrogen. Nitrogen does not take part in combustion, but at high temperatures
some nitrogen will be converted to NO  
 _x_ (mostly NO, with much smaller amounts of NO  
2). On the other hand, when there is insufficient oxygen to completely combust
the fuel, some fuel carbon is converted to carbon monoxide and some of the
hydrogen remains unreacted. A more complete set of equations for the
combustion of a hydrocarbon in the air, therefore, requires an additional
calculation for the distribution of oxygen between the carbon and hydrogen in
the fuel.

The amount of air required for complete combustion to take place is known as
theoretical air. However, in practice, the air used is 2-3x that of
theoretical air.

Incomplete combustion will occur when there is not enough oxygen to allow the
fuel to react completely to produce carbon dioxide and water. It also happens
when the combustion is quenched by a heat sink, such as a solid surface or
flame trap. As is the case with complete combustion, water is produced by
incomplete combustion; however, carbon, carbon monoxide, and/or hydroxide are
produced instead of carbon dioxide.

For most fuels, such as diesel oil, coal or wood, pyrolysis occurs before
combustion. In incomplete combustion, products of pyrolysis remain unburnt and
contaminate the smoke with noxious particulate matter and gases. Partially
oxidized compounds are also a concern; partial oxidation of ethanol can
produce harmful acetaldehyde, and carbon can produce toxic carbon monoxide.

The quality of combustion can be improved by the designs of combustion
devices, such as burners and internal combustion engines. Further improvements
are achievable by catalytic after-burning devices (such as catalytic
converters) or by the simple partial return of the exhaust gases into the
combustion process. Such devices are required by environmental legislation for
cars in most countries and may be necessary to enable large combustion
devices, such as thermal power stations, to reach legal emission standards.

The degree of combustion can be measured and analyzed with test equipment.
HVAC contractors, firemen and engineers use combustion analyzers to test the
efficiency of a burner during the combustion process. In addition, the
efficiency of an internal combustion engine can be measured in this way, and
some U.S. states and local municipalities use combustion analysis to define
and rate the efficiency of vehicles on the road today.

Carbon monoxide is one of the products from incomplete combustion.[4] Carbon
is released in the normal incomplete combustion reaction, forming soot and
dust. Since carbon monoxide is considered as a poisonous gas, complete
combustion is preferable, as carbon monoxide may also lead to respiratory
troubles when breathed since it takes the place of oxygen and combines with
hemoglobin.[5]

These oxides combine with water and oxygen in the atmosphere, creating nitric
acid and sulfuric acids, which return to Earth's surface as acid deposition,
or "acid rain." Acid deposition harms aquatic organisms and kills trees. Due
to its formation of certain nutrients which are less available to plants such
as calcium and phosphorus, it reduces the productivity of ecosystem and farms.
An additional problem associated with nitrogen oxides is that they, along with
hydrocarbon pollutants, contribute to the formation of tropospheric ozone, a
major component of smog.

Breathing carbon monoxide causes headache, dizziness, vomiting, and nausea. If
carbon monoxide levels are high enough, humans become unconscious or die.
Exposure to moderate and high levels of carbon monoxide over long periods of
time are positively correlation with risk of heart disease. People who survive
severe CO poisoning may suffer long-term health problems.[7] Carbon monoxide
from air is absorbed in the lungs which then binds with hemoglobin in human's
red blood cells. This would reduce the capacity of red blood cells to carry
oxygen throughout the body.

Smouldering is the slow, low-temperature, flameless form of combustion,
sustained by the heat evolved when oxygen directly attacks the surface of a
condensed-phase fuel. It is a typically incomplete combustion reaction. Solid
materials that can sustain a smouldering reaction include coal, cellulose,
wood, cotton, tobacco, peat, duff, humus, synthetic foams, charring polymers
(including polyurethane foam) and dust. Common examples of smoldering
phenomena are the initiation of residential fires on upholstered furniture by
weak heat sources (e.g., a cigarette, a short-circuited wire) and the
persistent combustion of biomass behind the flaming fronts of wildfires.

Rapid combustion is a form of combustion, otherwise known as a fire, in which
large amounts of heat and light energy are released, which often results in a
flame. This is used in a form of machinery such as internal combustion engines
and in thermobaric weapons. Such a combustion is frequently called an
explosion, though for an internal combustion engine this is inaccurate.[
_disputed – discuss_] An internal combustion engine nominally operates on a
controlled rapid burn. When the fuel-air mixture in an internal combustion
engine explodes, that is known as detonation.[ _disputed – discuss_]

Spontaneous combustion is a type of combustion which occurs by self-heating
(increase in temperature due to exothermic internal reactions), followed by
thermal runaway (self-heating which rapidly accelerates to high temperatures)
and finally, ignition. For example, phosphorus self-ignites at room
temperature without the application of heat. Organic materials undergoing
bacterial composting can generate enough heat to reach the point of
combustion.[8]

Combustion resulting in a turbulent flame is the most used for industrial
application (e.g. gas turbines, gasoline engines, etc.) because the turbulence
helps the mixing process between the fuel and oxidizer.

The term 'micro' gravity refers to a gravitational state that is 'low' (i.e.,
'micro' in the sense of 'small' and not necessarily a millionth of Earth's
normal gravity) such that the influence of buoyancy on physical processes may
be considered small relative to other flow processes that would be present at
normal gravity. In such an environment, the thermal and flow transport
dynamics can behave quite differently than in normal gravity conditions (e.g.,
a candle's flame takes the shape of a sphere.[9]). Microgravity combustion
research contributes to the understanding of a wide variety of aspects that
are relevant to both the environment of a spacecraft (e.g., fire dynamics
relevant to crew safety on the International Space Station) and terrestrial
(Earth-based) conditions (e.g., droplet combustion dynamics to assist
developing new fuel blends for improved combustion, materials fabrication
processes, thermal management of electronic systems, multiphase flow boiling
dynamics, and many others).

Combustion processes which happen in very small volumes are considered micro-
combustion. The high surface-to-volume ratio increases specific heat loss.
Quenching distance plays a vital role in stabilizing the flame in such
combustion chambers.

Generally, the chemical equation for stoichiometric combustion of a
hydrocarbon in oxygen is:

where  z = x + y 4 {\displaystyle z=x+{\frac {y}{4}}} ![{\\displaystyle
z=x+{\\frac
{y}{4}}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/08cfd3ca6aa985f4ced97f61920326016766d155).

For example, the stoichiometric burning of propane in oxygen is:

If the stoichiometric combustion takes place using air as the oxygen source,
the nitrogen present in the air (Atmosphere of Earth) can be added to the
equation (although it does not react) to show the stoichiometric composition
of the fuel in air and the composition of the resultant flue gas. Note that
treating all non-oxygen components in air as nitrogen gives a 'nitrogen' to
oxygen ratio of 3.77, i.e. (100% - O2%) / O2% where O2% is 20.95% vol:

where  z = x + 1 4 y {\displaystyle z=x+{\frac {1}{4}}y} ![{\\displaystyle
z=x+{\\frac
{1}{4}}y}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/808712578fb190558b7035c7e2b570a61ddc01c5).

For example, the stoichiometric combustion of propane ( C 3 H 8 {\displaystyle
{{\ce {C3H8}}}} ![{\\displaystyle {\\ce
{C3H8}}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/5683041955e62013b1ea353a2039c7159d85bd00))
in air is:

The stoichiometric composition of propane in air is 1 / (1 + 5 + 18.87) =
4.02% vol

Various other substances begin to appear in significant amounts in combustion
products when the flame temperature is above about 1600 K. When excess air is
used, nitrogen may oxidize to NO and, to a much lesser extent, to NO  
2. CO forms by disproportionation of CO  
2, and H  
2 and OH form by disproportionation of H  
2O.

For example, when 1 mol of propane is burned with 28.6 mol of air (120% of the
stoichiometric amount), the combustion products contain 3.3% O  
2. At 1400 K, the equilibrium combustion products contain 0.03% NO and 0.002% OH. At 1800 K, the combustion products contain 0.17% NO, 0.05% OH, 0.01% CO, and 0.004% H  
2.[10]

Diesel engines are run with an excess of oxygen to combust small particles
that tend to form with only a stoichiometric amount of oxygen, necessarily
producing nitrogen oxide emissions. Both the United States and European Union
enforce limits to vehicle nitrogen oxide emissions, which necessitate the use
of special catalytic converters or treatment of the exhaust with urea (see
Diesel exhaust fluid).

The incomplete (partial) combustion of a hydrocarbon with oxygen produces a
gas mixture containing mainly CO  
2, CO, H  
2O, and H  
2. Such gas mixtures are commonly prepared for use as protective atmospheres for the heat-treatment of metals and for gas carburizing.[11] The general reaction equation for incomplete combustion of one mole of a hydrocarbon in oxygen is: 

When _z_ falls below roughly 50% of the stoichiometric value, CH  
4 can become an important combustion product; when _z_ falls below roughly 35%
of the stoichiometric value, elemental carbon may become stable.

The products of incomplete combustion can be calculated with the aid of a
material balance, together with the assumption that the combustion products
reach equilibrium.[12][13] For example, in the combustion of one mole of
propane (C  
3H  
8) with four moles of O  
2, seven moles of combustion gas are formed, and _z_ is 80% of the
stoichiometric value. The three elemental balance equations are:

These three equations are insufficient in themselves to calculate the
combustion gas composition. However, at the equilibrium position, the water-
gas shift reaction gives another equation:

For example, at 1200 K the value of _K eq_ is 0.728.[14] Solving, the
combustion gas consists of 42.4% H  
2O, 29.0% CO  
2, 14.7% H  
2, and 13.9% CO. Carbon becomes a stable phase at 1200 K and 1 atm pressure
when z is less than 30% of the stoichiometric value, at which point the
combustion products contain more than 98% H  
2 and CO and about 0.5% CH  
4. 

Substances or materials which undergo combustion are called fuels. The most
common examples are natural gas, propane, kerosene, diesel, petrol, charcoal,
coal, wood, etc.

Combustion of a liquid fuel in an oxidizing atmosphere actually happens in the
gas phase. It is the vapor that burns, not the liquid. Therefore, a liquid
will normally catch fire only above a certain temperature: its flash point.
The flash point of a liquid fuel is the lowest temperature at which it can
form an ignitable mix with air. It is the minimum temperature at which there
is enough evaporated fuel in the air to start combustion.

Combustion of gaseous fuels may occur through one of four distinctive types of
burning: diffusion flame, premixed flame, autoignitive reaction front, or as a
detonation.[15] The type of burning that actually occurs depends on the degree
to which the fuel and oxidizer are mixed prior to heating: for example, a
diffusion flame is formed if the fuel and oxidizer are separated initially,
whereas a premixed flame is formed otherwise. Similarly, the type of burning
also depends on the pressure: a detonation, for example, is an autoignitive
reaction front coupled to a strong shock wave giving it its characteristic
high-pressure peak and high detonation velocity.[15]

The act of combustion consists of three relatively distinct but overlapping
phases:

Efficient process heating requires recovery of the largest possible part of a
fuel’s heat of combustion into the material being processed.[16][17] There are
many avenues of loss in the operation of a heating process. Typically, the
dominant loss is sensible heat leaving with the offgas (i.e., the flue gas).
The temperature and quantity of offgas indicates its heat content (enthalpy),
so keeping its quantity low minimizes heat loss.

In a perfect furnace, the combustion air flow would be matched to the fuel
flow to give each fuel molecule the exact amount of oxygen needed to cause
complete combustion. However, in the real world, combustion does not proceed
in a perfect manner. Unburned fuel (usually CO and H  
2) discharged from the system represents a heating value loss (as well as a
safety hazard). Since combustibles are undesirable in the offgas, while the
presence of unreacted oxygen there presents minimal safety and environmental
concerns, the first principle of combustion management is to provide more
oxygen than is theoretically needed to ensure that all the fuel burns. For
methane (CH  
4) combustion, for example, slightly more than two molecules of oxygen are
required.

The second principle of combustion management, however, is to not use too much
oxygen. The correct amount of oxygen requires three types of measurement:
first, active control of air and fuel flow; second, offgas oxygen measurement;
and third, measurement of offgas combustibles. For each heating process, there
exists an optimum condition of minimal offgas heat loss with acceptable levels
of combustibles concentration. Minimizing excess oxygen pays an additional
benefit: for a given offgas temperature, the NOx level is lowest when excess
oxygen is kept lowest.[3]

Adherence to these two principles is furthered by making material and heat
balances on the combustion process.[18][19][20][21] The material balance
directly relates the air/fuel ratio to the percentage of O  
2 in the combustion gas. The heat balance relates the heat available for the
charge to the overall net heat produced by fuel combustion.[22][23] Additional
material and heat balances can be made to quantify the thermal advantage from
preheating the combustion air,[24][25] or enriching it in oxygen.[26][27]

Combustion in oxygen is a chain reaction in which many distinct radical
intermediates participate. The high energy required for initiation is
explained by the unusual structure of the dioxygen molecule. The lowest-energy
configuration of the dioxygen molecule is a stable, relatively unreactive
diradical in a triplet spin state. Bonding can be described with three bonding
electron pairs and two antibonding electrons, with spins aligned, such that
the molecule has nonzero total angular momentum. Most fuels, on the other
hand, are in a singlet state, with paired spins and zero total angular
momentum. Interaction between the two is quantum mechanically a "forbidden
transition", i.e. possible with a very low probability. To initiate
combustion, energy is required to force dioxygen into a spin-paired state, or
singlet oxygen. This intermediate is extremely reactive. The energy is
supplied as heat, and the reaction then produces additional heat, which allows
it to continue.

Combustion of hydrocarbons is thought to be initiated by hydrogen atom
abstraction (not proton abstraction) from the fuel to oxygen, to give a
hydroperoxide radical (HOO). This reacts further to give hydroperoxides, which
break up to give hydroxyl radicals. There are a great variety of these
processes that produce fuel radicals and oxidizing radicals. Oxidizing species
include singlet oxygen, hydroxyl, monatomic oxygen, and hydroperoxyl. Such
intermediates are short-lived and cannot be isolated. However, non-radical
intermediates are stable and are produced in incomplete combustion. An example
is acetaldehyde produced in the combustion of ethanol. An intermediate in the
combustion of carbon and hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, is of special
importance because it is a poisonous gas, but also economically useful for the
production of syngas.

Solid and heavy liquid fuels also undergo a great number of pyrolysis
reactions that give more easily oxidized, gaseous fuels. These reactions are
endothermic and require constant energy input from the ongoing combustion
reactions. A lack of oxygen or other improperly designed conditions result in
these noxious and carcinogenic pyrolysis products being emitted as thick,
black smoke.

The rate of combustion is the amount of a material that undergoes combustion
over a period of time. It can be expressed in grams per second (g/s) or
kilograms per second (kg/s).

Detailed descriptions of combustion processes, from the chemical kinetics
perspective, requires the formulation of large and intricate webs of
elementary reactions.[28] For instance, combustion of hydrocarbon fuels
typically involve hundreds of chemical species reacting according to thousands
of reactions.

Inclusion of such mechanisms within computational flow solvers still
represents a pretty challenging task mainly in two aspects. First, the number
of degrees of freedom (proportional to the number of chemical species) can be
dramatically large; second, the source term due to reactions introduces a
disparate number of time scales which makes the whole dynamical system stiff.
As a result, the direct numerical simulation of turbulent reactive flows with
heavy fuels soon becomes intractable even for modern supercomputers.[29]

Therefore, a plethora of methodologies has been devised for reducing the
complexity of combustion mechanisms without resorting to high detail level.
Examples are provided by:

The kinetic modelling may be explored for insight into the reaction mechanisms
of thermal decomposition in the combustion of different materials by using for
instance Thermogravimetric analysis.[48]

Assuming perfect combustion conditions, such as complete combustion under
adiabatic conditions (i.e., no heat loss or gain), the adiabatic combustion
temperature can be determined. The formula that yields this temperature is
based on the first law of thermodynamics and takes note of the fact that the
heat of combustion is used entirely for heating the fuel, the combustion air
or oxygen, and the combustion product gases (commonly referred to as the _flue
gas_ ).

In the case of fossil fuels burnt in air, the combustion temperature depends
on all of the following:

The adiabatic combustion temperature (also known as the _adiabatic flame
temperature_ ) increases for higher heating values and inlet air and fuel
temperatures and for stoichiometric air ratios approaching one.

Most commonly, the adiabatic combustion temperatures for coals are around
2,200 °C (3,992 °F) (for inlet air and fuel at ambient temperatures and for  λ
= 1.0 {\displaystyle \lambda =1.0} ![\\lambda
=1.0](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/3990e3610d238215b70decb263c98b2681e2a1f0)),
around 2,150 °C (3,902 °F) for oil and 2,000 °C (3,632 °F) for natural
gas.[49][50]

In industrial fired heaters, power station steam generators, and large gas-
fired turbines, the more common way of expressing the usage of more than the
stoichiometric combustion air is _percent excess combustion air_. For example,
excess combustion air of 15 percent means that 15 percent more than the
required stoichiometric air is being used.

Combustion instabilities are typically violent pressure oscillations in a
combustion chamber. These pressure oscillations can be as high as 180 dB, and
long-term exposure to these cyclic pressure and thermal loads reduce the life
of engine components. In rockets, such as the F1 used in the Saturn V program,
instabilities led to massive damage to the combustion chamber and surrounding
components. This problem was solved by re-designing the fuel injector. In
liquid jet engines, the droplet size and distribution can be used to attenuate
the instabilities. Combustion instabilities are a major concern in ground-
based gas turbine engines because of NOx emissions. The tendency is to run
lean, an equivalence ratio less than 1, to reduce the combustion temperature
and thus reduce the NOx emissions; however, running the combustion lean makes
it very susceptible to combustion instability.

The Rayleigh Criterion is the basis for analysis of thermoacoustic combustion
instability and is evaluated using the Rayleigh Index over one cycle of
instability[51]

where q' is the heat release rate perturbation and p' is the pressure
fluctuation.[52][53] When the heat release oscillations are in phase with the
pressure oscillations, the Rayleigh Index is positive and the magnitude of the
thermo acoustic instability is maximised. On the other hand, if the Rayleigh
Index is negative, then thermoacoustic damping occurs. The Rayleigh Criterion
implies that a thermoacoustic instability can be optimally controlled by
having heat release oscillations 180 degrees out of phase with pressure
oscillations at the same frequency.[54][55] This minimizes the Rayleigh Index.

