**Cruise control** (sometimes known as **speed control** or **autocruise** ,
or **tempomat** in some countries) is a system that automatically controls the
speed of a motor vehicle. The system is a servomechanism that takes over the
throttle of the car to maintain a steady speed as set by the driver.

Speed control was used in automobiles as early as 1900 in the Wilson-Pilcher
and also in the 1910s by Peerless. Peerless advertised that their system would
"maintain speed whether up hill or down". The technology was adopted by James
Watt and Matthew Boulton in 1788 to control steam engines, but the use of
governors dates at least back to the 17th century. On an engine the governor
adjusts the throttle position as the speed of the engine changes with
different loads, so as to maintain a near constant speed.

Modern cruise control (also known as a speedostat or tempomat) was invented in
1948 by the inventor and mechanical engineer Ralph Teetor.[1] His idea was
borne out of the frustration of riding in a car driven by his lawyer, who kept
speeding up and slowing down as he talked. The first car with Teetor's system
was the 1958 Imperial (called "Auto-pilot") using a speed dial on the
dashboard.[2] This system calculated ground speed based on driveshaft
rotations off the rotating speedometer-cable, and used a bi-directional screw-
drive electric motor to vary throttle position as needed.

A 1955 U.S. Patent for a "Constant Speed Regulator" was filed in 1950 by M-Sgt
Frank J. Riley.[3] He installed his invention, which he conceived while
driving on the Pennsylvania Turnpike, on his own car in 1948.[4] Another
inventor named Harold Exline, working independently of Riley, also invented a
type of cruise control, which he first installed on his own car and on cars
belonging to friends of his. Exline filed a U.S. Patent for "Vacuum Powered
Throttle Control With Electrically Controlled Air Valve" in 1951, and the
Patent was granted in 1956.[5] Despite these patents, Riley, Exline, and the
subsequent patent holders were not able to collect royalties for any of the
inventions using cruise control.

In 1965, American Motors (AMC) introduced a low-priced automatic speed control
for its large-sized cars with automatic transmissions.[6] The AMC "Cruise-
Command" unit was engaged by a push-button once the desired speed was reached
and then the throttle position was adjusted by a vacuum control directly from
the speedometer cable rather than a separate dial on the dashboard.[6][7]

Daniel Aaron Wisner invented "Automotive Electronic Cruise Control" in 1968 as
an engineer for RCA's Industrial and Automation Systems Division in Plymouth,
Michigan. His invention described in two patents filed that year (US 3570622 &
US 3511329), with the second modifying his original design by debuting digital
memory, was the first electronic device in controlling a car. Two decades
passed before an integrated circuit for his design was developed by Motorola
as the MC14460 Automotive Speed Control Processor[8] in CMOS. The advantage of
electronic speed control over its mechanical predecessor was that it could be
integrated with electronic accident avoidance and engine management systems.

Following the 1973 oil crisis and rising fuel prices, the device became more
popular in the U.S.[9] "Cruise control can save gas by avoiding surges that
expel fuel" while driving at steady speeds.[9] In 1974, AMC, GM, and Chrysler
priced the option at $60 to $70, while Ford charged $103.[9]

The driver must bring the vehicle up to speed manually and use a button to set
the cruise control to the current speed.

The cruise control takes its speed signal from a rotating driveshaft,
speedometer cable, wheel speed sensor from the engine's RPM, or from internal
speed pulses produced electronically by the vehicle. Most systems do not allow
the use of the cruise control below a certain speed - typically around 25 mph
(40 km/h). The vehicle will maintain the desired speed by pulling the throttle
cable with a solenoid, a vacuum driven servomechanism, or by using the
electronic systems built into the vehicle (fully electronic) if it uses a
'drive-by-wire' system.

All cruise control systems must be capable of being turned off both explicitly
and automatically when the driver depresses the brake, and often also the
clutch. Cruise control often includes a memory feature to resume the set speed
after braking, and a coast feature to reduce the set speed without braking.
When the cruise control is engaged, the throttle can still be used to
accelerate the car, but once the pedal is released the car will then slow down
until it reaches the previously set speed.

On the latest vehicles fitted with electronic throttle control, cruise control
can be easily integrated into the vehicle's engine management system. Modern
"adaptive" systems (see below) include the ability to automatically reduce
speed when the distance to a car in front, or the speed limit, decreases. This
is an advantage for those driving in unfamiliar areas.

The cruise control systems of some vehicles incorporate a "speed limiter"
function, which will not allow the vehicle to accelerate beyond a pre-set
maximum; this can usually be overridden by fully depressing the accelerator
pedal. (Most systems will prevent the vehicle accelerating beyond the chosen
speed, but will not apply the brakes in the event of overspeeding downhill.)

On vehicles with a manual transmission, cruise control is less flexible
because the act of depressing the clutch pedal and shifting gears usually
disengages the cruise control. The "resume" feature has to be used each time
after selecting the new gear and releasing the clutch. Therefore, cruise
control is of most benefit at motorway/highway speeds when top gear is used
virtually all the time.

Some advantages of cruise control include:

However, when used incorrectly cruise control can lead to accidents due to
several factors, such as:

Some modern vehicles have systems for adaptive cruise control (ACC), which is
a general term meaning improved cruise control. These improvements can be
automatic braking or dynamic set-speed type controls.

Automatic Braking Type: the automatic braking type use either a single or
combination of sensors (radar, lidar,and camera) to allow the vehicle to keep
pace with the car it is following, slow when closing in on the vehicle in
front and accelerating again to the preset speed when traffic allows. Some
systems also feature forward collision warning systems, which warn the driver
if a vehicle in front—given the speed of both vehicles—gets too close (within
the preset headway or braking distance).

Dynamic Set Speed Type: The dynamic set speed uses the GPS position of speed
limit signs, from a database. Some are modifiable by the driver.

Non-Braking Type: The speed can be adjusted to allow traffic calming.[
_citation needed_ ]

Dynamic radar cruise control: uses a camera and millimeter-wave radar to
maintain a set point distance from vehicles in front of the car; the system
will automatically slow down or speed up based on the vehicles in front.[11]

Vehicles with adaptive cruise control are considered a Level 1 autonomous car,
as defined by SAE International.[12]

PID controller \- Fundamental control concept used in car cruise control

