**Curtis Thomas Simmons** (born May 19, 1929) is an American former
professional baseball left-handed pitcher, who played in Major League Baseball
(MLB) from 1947 to 1950 and 1952 to 1967. Along with right-hander Robin
Roberts (a member of the Baseball Hall of Fame), Simmons was one of the twin
anchors of the starting rotation of the "Whiz Kids", the Philadelphia
Phillies' 1950 National League (NL) championship team. He is the youngest
surviving player from the team. Simmons is also the oldest living former
member of the Los Angeles Angels organization. He also played for the St.
Louis Cardinals and Chicago Cubs

While attending Whitehall High School, Simmons led his high school team to
three straight league titles, and also led the Coplay American Legion team to
two Pennsylvania state crowns.[1]

In 1947, Phillies owner Bob Carpenter arranged for an exhibition match between
his Phillies and a team of all-star high school players from the Lehigh
Valley. The game was played on the opening day of Egypt Memorial Park in front
of a crowd of 4,500. Simmons struck out eleven and the game ended in a 4–4 tie
(a late-game error was the only thing that prevented the high school team from
winning). The 5 ft 11 in (1.80 m), 175 lb (79 kg) lefty was signed by the
Phillies, and awarded a $65,000 signing bonus (one of the highest ever awarded
at that time).[1] That spring, Simmons also pitched and played outfield in an
All-American high school game between teams managed by Babe Ruth and Ty Cobb.
In 1949, Simmons returned to the Lehigh Valley, pitching for the Phillies in
an exhibition match (a game won by a 10–3 margin) against the Allentown
Redbirds, in front of a record crowd of 4,590 at Whitehall's Breadon Field.

Simmons won 17 of 25 decisions during the 1950 season, playing a role in
bringing Philadelphia its second National League (NL) championship of the 20th
century. With the outbreak of the Korean War, however, Simmons was called to
active military service in September 1950, with only a month remaining in the
campaign. The Phillies managed to hold off the Brooklyn Dodgers in the 1950
season's final contest (on Dick Sisler's 10th-inning home run) to win the NL
flag by two games. Simmons was stationed at Camp Atterbury and requested and
was granted a leave on October 4, 1950 to attend the Series. The Phillies
chose not to request that Commissioner of Baseball Happy Chandler rule Simmons
eligible for the Series, but Simmons chose to attend to support the team.
Simmons' place on the Series roster was taken by pitcher Jocko Thompson.[2]
Without Simmons, the Phillies were swept in four games by Joe DiMaggio and the
New York Yankees.

Simmons also missed the entire 1951 campaign while in the military, but he
returned in 1952 to win 14 games and post a stellar 2.82 earned run average
(ERA). The team would never again contend for a championship during his tenure
there, although Simmons continued to pitch into the late 1950s. In 1959, he
was stricken with a sore arm, and in 1960, the Phillies – now in last place
and in rebuilding mode – released him on May 17, 1960, after four mound
appearances. Signed as a free agent by the St. Louis Cardinals three days
later, Simmons began a comeback that culminated in 15- and 18-game-winning
seasons in 1963–1964, while in a pitching rotation that included Bob Gibson
and Ray Sadecki. In 1964, he appeared in the World Series against the Yankees.
He started two games for the eventual world champion Cardinals, losing his
only decision but compiling a 2.51 ERA.

Simmons’ last winning record was in 1964; he lost 15 games for St. Louis in
1965, then finished his career with the Chicago Cubs and California Angels, in
1966–1967. His final record, over 20 years, was 193–182 (.515). In 569 games
pitched and 3,348​1⁄3 innings, Simmons allowed 3,313 hits and 1,063 bases on
balls. He recorded 1,697 strikeouts, 163 complete games, 36 shutouts, and five
saves. Along with Smoky Burgess, Simmons was the last player to formally
retire who had played in MLB in the 1940s (not counting Minnie Miñoso, who
would later un-retire, twice). MLB Hall of Fame hitters Hank Aaron[3] and Stan
Musial[4] each separately named Simmons as the toughest pitcher they had to
face in their careers.

