**Frederick "Cy" Williams** (December 21, 1887 – April 23, 1974) was an
American professional baseball player.[1] He played in Major League Baseball
as an outfielder for the Chicago Cubs (1912–17) and Philadelphia Phillies
(1918–30).[1] As Major League Baseball emerged from the dead-ball era,
Williams became one of the most prominent home run hitters in the National
League.[2][3][4]

Born in Wadena, Indiana, Williams attended Notre Dame where he studied
architecture and played football with Knute Rockne.[2] His hitting prowess
caught the attention of the Chicago Cubs, who purchased his contract after he
graduated from college.[2] Williams made his major league debut with the Cubs
on July 18, 1912 at the age of 24.[1] From 1915 to 1927 he was a consistent
power hitting center fielder, leading the National League in home runs four
times during his career.[1] He is the only player other than Babe Ruth to lead
a major league in home runs in both the dead-ball era and live-ball era
(leading the National League with 12 and 15 home runs in 1916 and 1920, then
with 41 and 30 in 1923 and 1927).

Williams was the first National League player to hit 200 career home runs, and
is one of three players born before 1900 to hit 200 homers in his career (Babe
Ruth and Rogers Hornsby are the others). He was the National League's career
home run leader until his record of 251 was surpassed by Hornsby in 1929.[2]

Williams is the Phillies' all-time leader in extra-innings grand slams with
two and holds the major league record for being the oldest player ever to win
a home run title, hitting 30 home runs to win the National League home run
title in 1927 at 39 years of age. Williams hit for the cycle on August 5,
1927. He hit 3 home runs on May 11, 1923. Williams went 5 for 5 on September
6, 1924, his only 5-hit game in his career.

In a 19-year major league career, Williams played in 2,002 games, accumulating
1,981 hits in 6,780 at bats for a .292 career batting average along with 251
home runs, 1,005 runs batted in and an on-base percentage of .365.[1] He hit
over .300 six times in his career. An excellent defensive player, Williams had
a .973 career fielding percentage, which was nine points higher than the
league average during his playing career.[1]

The Williams Shift, in which defensive players moved to the right side of the
playing field, is often associated with Ted Williams, but it was actually
first employed against Cy Williams during the 1920s.[3][4] He played in his
final major league game on September 22, 1930 at the age of 42.[1] In 1931,
Williams served as a player-manager in the minor leagues for the Richmond
Byrds of the Eastern League.[5]

After retirement, Williams worked as an architect at the 3 Lakes Theatre in
Three Lakes, Wisconsin since 1949. Before that, he designed the 3 Lakes
Theatre's exterior and interior and later opened that June of the same
year.[2][6] Williams died in Three Lakes at the age of 86 in 1974 after the 3
Lakes Theatre closed a year before his death. The 3 Lakes later reopened in
June of 2009 playing second-run and classic as the "Three Lakes Center For The
Arts."

