**Daisuke Namikawa** (浪川 大輔, _Namikawa Daisuke_ , born April 2, 1976) is a
Japanese voice actor singer and actor who began acting at the age of 8 and is
sometimes mistaken for fellow voice actor Daisuke Hirakawa, as their names
only differ by one character when written in kanji.[1] Despite his wide range
of voice casting, he is usually cast as young, kind heroes such as Mikage in
_07-Ghost_ , Fay D. Flourite in _Tsubasa: Reservoir Chronicle_ , Jellal
Fernandes and his counterpart Mystogan from _Fairy Tail_ , Rokuro "Rock"
Okajima in _Black Lagoon_ and Keita Ibuki in _Black God_ , but he is also cast
as cold anti-heroes or villains such as Ulquiorra Cifer in _Bleach_ , Hisoka
Morow in _Hunter x Hunter (2011)_ , Kei Kurono in _Gantz_ , Eustass Kid in
_One Piece_ and Toutaku Chuuei in _Ikki Tousen_.

He is the official Japanese dub-over voice artist for American actor Elijah
Wood and Canadian actor Hayden Christensen. He has also dubbed over some roles
that were performed by other fellow actors such as: Leonardo DiCaprio, Tony
Jaa, Edward Furlong and Kevin Zegers in Japanese. He made his directorial
debut for _Wonderful World,_ a live-action film that opened in Japan in early
summer of 2010. He also starred in the film itself along with fellow voice
actors, Mamoru Miyano, Tomokazu Sugita, Tomokazu Seki, Rikiya Koyama, Yuka
Hirata, Toshiyuki Morikawa, Koichi Yamadera, Showtaro Morikubo and Yuko
Kaida.[2] He won for Best Actor in supporting roles in the 4th Seiyu Awards.

In 2017, it was reported that Namikawa had been in an adulterous relationship
with a female employee from his agency since 2004. He eventually apologized
for it.[3]

Unknown date

