**Decca Records** is a British major record label established in 1929 by
Edward Lewis. Its U.S. label was established in late 1934 by Lewis, along with
American Decca's first president Jack Kapp and later American Decca president
Milton Rackmil. In 1937, anticipating Nazi aggression leading to World War II,
Lewis sold American Decca and the link between the UK and U.S. Decca labels
was broken for several decades.[2] The British label was renowned for its
development of recording methods, while the American company developed the
concept of cast albums in the musical genre. Both wings are now part of the
Universal Music Group, which is owned by Vivendi, a media conglomerate
headquartered in Paris, France. The US Decca label was the foundation company
that evolved into UMG (Universal Music Group).

The name "Decca" was coined by Wilfred S. Samuel by merging the word "Mecca"
with the initial D of their logo "Dulcet" or their trademark "Dulcephone".[3]
Samuel, a linguist, chose "Decca" as a brand name as it was easy to pronounce
in most languages. The name dates back to a portable gramophone called the
"Decca Dulcephone" patented in 1914 by musical instrument makers Barnett
Samuel and Sons. That company was eventually renamed the Decca Gramophone Co.
Ltd. and then sold to former stockbroker Edward Lewis in 1929. Within years,
Decca Records Ltd. was the second largest record label in the world, calling
itself "The Supreme Record Company". Decca bought the UK branch of Brunswick
Records and continued to run it under that name. In the 1950s the American
Decca studios were located in the Pythian Temple in New York City.[4]

In classical music, Decca had a long way to go from its modest beginnings to
catch up with the established HMV and Columbia labels (later merged as EMI).
The pre-war classical repertoire on Decca was not extensive, but was select.
The 3-disc 1929 recording of Delius's _Sea Drift_, arising from the Delius
Festival that year, suffered by being crammed onto six sides, being
indifferently recorded and expensive; following issue in July they were
already withdrawn by October the same year.[5] However, it won Decca the
loyalty of the baritone Roy Henderson, who went on to record for them the
first complete _Dido and Aeneas_ of Purcell with Nancy Evans and the Boyd Neel
ensemble (Purcell Club, 14 sides, issued February 1936[5]); and Henderson's
famous pupil Kathleen Ferrier was recorded and issued by Decca through the
period of transition from 78 to LP (1946–1952). Heinrich Schlusnus made
important pre-war lieder recordings for Decca.

Decca's emergence as a major classical label may be attributed to three
concurrent events: the emphasis on technical innovation (first the development
of the full frequency range recording [ffrr] technique, then the early use of
stereophonic recording), the introduction of the long-playing record, and the
recruitment of John Culshaw to Decca's London office.

Decca released the stereo recordings of Ernest Ansermet conducting L'Orchestre
de la Suisse Romande, including, in 1959, the first complete stereo LP
recording of _The Nutcracker_ , as well as Ansermet's only stereo version of
Manuel de Falla's _The Three-Cornered Hat_ , which the conductor had led at
its first performance in 1919.

John Culshaw, who joined Decca in 1946 in a junior post, rapidly became a
senior producer of classical recordings. He revolutionised recording – of
opera, in particular. Hitherto, the practice had been to put microphones in
front of the performers and simply record what they performed. Culshaw was
determined to make recordings that would be 'a theatre of the mind', making
the listener's experience at home not merely second best to being in the opera
house, but a wholly different experience. To that end he got the singers to
move about in the studio as they would onstage, used discreet sound effects
and different acoustics, and recorded in long continuous takes. His skill,
coupled with Decca's sound engineering capabilities, took the label into the
first flight of recording companies. His pioneering recording (begun in 1958)
of Wagner's _Der Ring des Nibelungen_ conducted by Georg Solti was a huge
artistic and commercial success (to the chagrin of other companies). Solti
recorded throughout his career for Decca, and made more than 250 recordings,
including 45 complete opera sets. Among the international honours given Solti
(and Decca) for his recordings were 31 Grammy awards – more than any other
recording artist, whether classical or popular.[6] In the wake of Decca's
lead, artists such as Herbert von Karajan, Joan Sutherland and later Luciano
Pavarotti were keen to join the company's roster.

However, Culshaw was, strictly speaking, not the first to do this. In 1951,
Columbia Records executive Goddard Lieberson partnered with Broadway conductor
Lehman Engel to record a series of previously unrecorded Broadway musical
scores for Columbia Masterworks, including what Engel, in his book _The
American Musical Theatre: A Consideration_ , termed "Broadway opera", and in
1951, they released the most complete _Porgy and Bess_ recorded up to that
time. Far from being a mere rendering of the score, the 3-LP album set used
sound effects to realistically recreate the production as if the listener were
watching a stage performance of the work.

Until 1947, American Decca issued British Decca classical music recordings.
Afterwards, British Decca took over distribution through its new American
subsidiary London Records. American Decca actively re-entered the classical
music field in 1950 with distribution deals from Deutsche Grammophon and
Parlophone.[7] American Decca began issuing its own classical music recordings
in 1956 when Israel Horowitz joined Decca to head its classical music
operations.[8] To further American Decca's dedication to serious music, in
August 1950, Rackmill announced the release of a new series of disks to be
known as the "Decca Gold Label Series" which was to be devoted to "symphonies,
concertos, chamber music, opera, songs and choral music."[9] American and
European artists were to be the performers. Among the classical recordings
released on Decca's "Gold Label" series[10] were albums by Leroy Anderson, the
Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra conducted by Max Rudolf and guitarist Andrés
Segovia. American Decca shut down its classical music department in 1971.[11]

Between 1973 and 1980, Decca championed new music through its _Headline_
imprint. Works given their recorded premiere included pieces by Peter Maxwell
Davies, Harrison Birtwistle, Luciano Berio, Hans Werner Henze, Witold
Lutoslawski, Toru Takemitsu, David Bedford, Thea Musgrave, Andrzej Panufnik,
Iannis Xenakis, Brian Ferneyhough and John Cage. Performers included Roger
Woodward, Stomu Yamash'ta, Salman Shukur, the Grimethorpe Colliery Band as
well as the composers themselves.

For many years, Decca's British classical recordings had been issued in the US
under the London Records label because the existence of the American Decca
company precluded the use of that name on British recordings distributed in
the US. When the MCA and PolyGram labels merged in 1999 and created Universal
Music, the practice was no longer necessary. Today Decca makes fewer major
classical recordings, but still has a full roster of stars, including Cecilia
Bartoli and Renée Fleming. Its back catalogue includes several landmark and
critically acclaimed recordings, such as the Solti _Ring_ , voted the greatest
recording of all time by critics with the _BBC Music Magazine_ ,[12] and
Luciano Pavarotti remained an exclusive Decca artist throughout his recording
career.

In 2017, Universal Music revived Decca's American classical music arm as Decca
Gold under the management of Verve Music Group.[13]

In Britain, Decca bought out the bankrupt UK branch of Brunswick Records in
1932, which added such stars as Bing Crosby and Al Jolson[14] to its roster.
Decca also bought out the Melotone and Edison Bell record companies. In late
1934, a United States branch of Decca was launched. In establishing the
American unit, the founders bought the former Brunswick Records pressing
plants in New York City and Muskegon, Michigan, which were shut down in 1931,
from Warner Bros. in exchange for a financial interest in the new label.[2]
Decca became a major player in the depressed American record market thanks to
its roster of popular artists, particularly Bing Crosby, the shrewd management
of former US Brunswick general manager Jack Kapp, and the decision to price
Decca at 35 cents. The US label also brought back the discontinued Champion
label (from Gennett), as well as a short-lived version of the Broadway label.
The following year, the pressing and Canadian distribution of US Decca records
was licensed to Compo Company Ltd. in Lachine, Quebec, a breakaway and rival
of Berliner Gram-o-phone Co. of Montreal, Quebec. (Compo was acquired by Decca
in 1951 although its Apex label continued in production for the next two
decades.) By 1939, Decca and EMI were the only record companies in the UK.
American Decca acquired Brunswick Records and its sublabel Vocalion Records in
1941 from Warner Bros., which had a financial interest in Decca.[2]

In 1939, British Decca head Edward Lewis sold his interest in American Decca
because of World War II. In 1942, stock in American Decca began trading on the
New York Stock Exchange as Decca Records Inc.[2] Therefore, the two Deccas
became separate companies and remained so until American Decca's parent
company bought British Decca's parent company in 1998 (during this time, US
Decca artists were issued in the UK on the Brunswick label until 1968 when MCA
Records was launched in the UK). Artists signed to American Decca in the 1930s
and 1940s included Louis Armstrong, Charlie Kunz, Count Basie, Jimmie
Lunceford, Jane Froman, the Boswell Sisters, Billie Holiday, Katherine Dunham,
the Andrews Sisters, Ted Lewis, Judy Garland, the Mills Brothers, Billy
Cotton, Guy Lombardo, Chick Webb, Louis Jordan, Bob Crosby, Bill Kenny & the
Ink Spots, the Dorsey Brothers (and subsequently Jimmy Dorsey after the
brothers split), Connee Boswell and Jack Hylton, Victor Young, Earl Hines,
Claude Hopkins, Ethel Smith, and Sister Rosetta Tharpe.

In 1940, American Decca released the first album of songs from the 1939 film
_The Wizard of Oz_. However, it was not a soundtrack album but a cover version
featuring only Judy Garland from the film, with other roles taken by the Ken
Darby Singers.

In 1942, American Decca released the first recording of "White Christmas" by
Bing Crosby. He recorded another version of the song in 1947 for Decca; to
this day, Crosby's recording of "White Christmas" for Decca remains the best-
selling single worldwide of all time.[15] In 1943, American Decca ushered in
the age of the original cast album in the United States, when they released an
album set of nearly all the songs from Rodgers and Hammerstein's _Oklahoma!_ ,
performed by the same cast who appeared in the show on Broadway, and using the
show's orchestra, conductor, chorus, and musical and vocal arrangements. The
enormous success of this album was followed by original cast recordings of
_Carousel_ and Irving Berlin's _Annie Get Your Gun_ , both featuring members
of the original casts of the shows and utilising those shows' vocal and choral
arrangements. Because of the technical restrictions of recording on 78 rpm
records, none of these scores were recorded totally complete; they were
shorter than cast albums made after LPs were introduced. But Decca had made
history by recording Broadway musicals, and the influence of these releases in
the recording of theatrical shows in the U.S. continues to this day – in
Decca's home country, the UK original cast albums had been a fixture for
years. Columbia Records followed with musical theatre albums, starting with
the 1946 revival of _Show Boat_. In 1947, RCA Victor released the original
cast album of _Brigadoon_. By the 1950s, many recording companies were
releasing Broadway show albums recorded by their original casts, and the
recording of original cast albums had become standard practice whenever a new
show opened.[16]

Decca throughout the 1930s and early to mid-1940s was a leading label of blues
and jump music with such best selling artists as Sister Rosetta Tharpe and
Louis Jordan (who was the best selling R&B artist of the 1940s). In 1954,
American Decca released "Rock Around the Clock" by Bill Haley & His Comets.
Produced by Milt Gabler, the recording was initially only moderately
successful, but when it was used as the theme song for the 1955 film
_Blackboard Jungle_ , it became the first international rock and roll hit, and
the first such recording to go to No. 1 on the American musical charts.
According to the _Guinness Book of Records_ , it went on to sell 25 million
copies, returning to the US and UK charts several times between 1955 and 1974.
But due to management and promotion decisions, Decca lost its place as a major
hit label on the US R&B and Pop charts as Bill Haley's popularity started to
fade, in the late 1950s. Decca's strong country catalogue did very well
throughout this period and they had a number of crossover-to-pop hits, as well
as the blockbuster success of Brenda Lee, but many R&B and rock music artists
passed through Decca with little success (The Flamingos, Billy Ward and his
Dominoes, Bobby Darin, The Shirelles, etc.)

American Decca embraced the new post-war record formats adopting the LP in
1949 and the 45 rpm record around a year later while continuing to sell
78s.[2] During the 1950s, American Decca released a number of soundtrack
recordings of popular motion pictures, notably Mike Todd's production of
_Around the World in Eighty Days_ (1956) with the music of veteran film
composer Victor Young. Since Decca had access to the stereophonic tracks of
the Oscar-winning film, they quickly released a stereo version in 1958.
Because American Decca bought Universal Pictures in 1952, many of these
soundtrack albums were of films released by what was then called Universal-
International Pictures.

In 1961, American Decca released the soundtrack album of _Flower Drum Song_ ,
Universal Pictures's film version of the 1958 Rodgers and Hammerstein musical.
In a reversal of the usual situation, in which American Decca had released
original Broadway cast albums of three Rodgers and Hammerstein shows, this was
the only film soundtrack album of a Rodgers and Hammerstein show ever released
by Decca, while the Broadway cast album had been released by Columbia
Masterworks.

The American RCA label severed its longtime affiliation with EMI's His
Master's Voice (HMV) label in 1957, which allowed British Decca to market and
distribute Elvis Presley's recordings in the UK on the RCA label (later RCA
Victor).[17]

British Decca had several missed opportunities. In 1960, they refused to
release "Tell Laura I Love Her" by Ray Peterson and even destroyed thousands
of copies of the single. A cover version by Ricky Valance was released by EMI
on the Columbia label, and spent three weeks at No. 1 on the British
charts.[18] In 1962, Decca turned down a chance to record The Beatles with the
comment "Guitar groups are on the way out", a historic mistake.[19] Other
refusals of note include the Yardbirds and Manfred Mann. Decca had earlier
accepted London-born pioneer rock'n'roll singer Terry Dene, who was later
known as the British Elvis Presley, and another Merseyside singer, Billy
Fury.[ _citation needed_ ]

The turning down of The Beatles led indirectly to the signing of one of
Decca's biggest 1960s artists, The Rolling Stones. Dick Rowe was judging a
talent contest with George Harrison, and Harrison mentioned to him that he
should take a look at the Stones, whom he had just seen live for the first
time a couple of weeks earlier. Rowe saw the Stones, and quickly signed them
to a contract. Decca also released the first recording of Rod Stewart in 1964,
("Good Morning Little Schoolgirl"/"I'm Gonna Move to the Outskirts of Town".)
Decca also signed up many rock artists (The Moody Blues, The Zombies, The
Applejacks, Dave Berry, Lulu, Alan Price) with varying degrees of success.

Staff producer Hugh Mendl (1919–2008)[20] worked for Decca for over 40 years
and played a significant role in its success in the popular field from the
1950s to the late 1970s. His first major production credit was pianist
Winifred Atwell. He produced _Rock Island Line_ , the breakthrough skiffle hit
for Lonnie Donegan, and he is credited as the first executive to spot the
potential of singer-actor Tommy Steele. Mendl's other productions included the
first album by humorist Ivor Cutler, _Who Tore Your Trousers?_ (1961),
_Frankie Howerd at The Establishment_ (1963), a series of recordings with
Paddy Roberts (best known for "The Ballad of Bethnal Green"), numerous
"original cast" and soundtrack albums including _Oh! What a Lovely War_ and
even an LP record of the 1966 Le Mans 24-hour race, inspired by his lifelong
passion for motor-racing. Mendl was a driving force in the establishment of
Decca's progressive Deram label, most notably as the executive producer of the
Moody Blues' groundbreaking 1967 LP _Days of Future Passed_. He is credited
with battling against Decca's notorious parsimonious treatment of their
artists, ensuring that the Moody Blues had the time and resources to develop
beyond their beat group origins into progressive rock, and he also used
profits for pop sales to cross-subsidise recordings by avant garde jazz
artists like John Surman.

British Decca lost a key source for American records when Atlantic Records
switched British distribution to Polydor Records in 1966 in order for Atlantic
to gain access to British recording artists which they did not have under
Decca distribution.[21][22] The Rolling Stones left Decca in 1970, and other
artists followed. Decca's deals with numerous other record labels began to
fall apart: RCA Records, for instance, abandoned Decca to set up its own UK
office in June 1969, just before the Rolling Stones decided to also abandon
Decca in favour of forming their own label. The Moody Blues were the only
international rock act that remained on the label. The company's fortunes
declined slightly during the 1970s, and it had few major commercial successes;
among those were Dana's 1970 two-million selling single, "All Kinds of
Everything", issued on their subsidiary label Rex Records.

Although Decca had set up the first of the British "progressive" labels,
Deram, in 1966, with such stars as Cat Stevens and the Moody Blues, by the
time the punk era set in 1977, Decca had pop success with such acts as John
Miles, novelty creation Father Abraham and the Smurfs, and productions by
longtime Decca associate Jonathan King. King had a hit, "Everyone's Gone to
the Moon", on Decca while he was an undergraduate at Trinity College,
Cambridge, and Edward Lewis recruited him as his personal assistant and
"talent spotter".[23][24] Decca became dependent on re-releases from its back
catalogue. Contemporary signings, such as Slaughter & the Dogs and the pre-
stardom Adam and the Ants (whose sole single with Decca, "Young Parisians",
would later be a UK Top 10 hit on the back of the band's success at
CBS),[25][26] were second division when compared to the likes of PolyGram,
CBS, EMI, and newcomer Virgin's rosters of hitmakers.

American Decca also released several notable spoken word albums, such as a
recording of Charles Dickens's _A Christmas Carol_ starring Ronald Colman as
Scrooge, and a recording of the Christmas chapter from _The Pickwick Papers_
read by Charles Laughton. These two separate 78-RPM albums were later combined
onto one LP. Other spoken word albums included _Lullaby of Christmas_ ,
narrated by Gregory Peck, a twenty-minute version of _Moby Dick_ , with
Charles Laughton as Captain Ahab, and _The Littlest Angel_ , narrated by
Loretta Young. British Decca released on LP, in 1968, the most complete
version of _Man of La Mancha_ ever put on vinyl records, a 2-LP album
featuring most of the dialogue and all of the songs, performed by the show's
original London cast. Keith Michell starred as Don Quixote and Cervantes, and
Joan Diener was Aldonza/Dulcinea. Around 1970, American Decca enjoyed success
with LPS of soundtrack dialogue excerpts from the films of W.C. Fields, the
Marx Brothers, and Mae West. The Fields and Marx Brothers albums were narrated
by radio personality and cartoon voice actor Gary Owens.

In 1934, Jack Kapp established a country & western line for the new Decca
label by signing Frank Luther, Sons of the Pioneers, Stuart Hamblen, The Ranch
Boys, and other popular acts based in both New York and Los Angeles. Louisiana
singer/composer Jimmie Davis began recording for Decca the same year, joined
by western vocalists Jimmy Wakely and Roy Rogers in 1940.[ _citation needed_ ]
From the late 1940s on, the US arm of Decca had a sizeable roster of country
artists, including Kitty Wells, Johnny Wright, Moon Mullican, Ernest Tubb,
Webb Pierce, the Wilburn Brothers, Bobbejaan Schoepen, and Red Foley. The main
architect of Decca's success in country music was Owen Bradley, who joined
Decca in 1947 and was promoted to Vice-President and head of A&R for the
Nashville operations in 1958.[27] Decca quickly became the main rival of RCA
Records as the top label for American country music, and remained so for
several decades.

As part of a licensing agreement with 4 Star Records, Patsy Cline joined the
Decca roster in 1956 (after releasing three singles on Decca's Coral Records
subsidiary, under the same agreement, beginning in 1955). While Cline's
contract was held by 4 Star, the deal allowed Decca complete control of the
recording sessions, including choice of Producer and musicians. However, it
also restricted the choice of material available for Cline to record to only
songs published by 4 Star. This proved to be a stipulation which hampered her
career for several years. Between 1955 and 1960, Cline recorded one album and
multiple singles under the agreement, but saw limited chart success and very
little money. In 1960, she signed directly with Decca. No longer bound by the
restrictions of the 4 Star agreement, Cline went on to achieve tremendous
success on both the Country and Pop charts. She recorded two more albums, and
released numerous singles, before her untimely death in a 1963 plane crash. A
number of posthumous singles and albums appeared in the years following.

The Wilburn Brothers signed to the label in 1954, and were ultimately awarded
a lifetime contract (20 years) in 1966. Doyle Wilburn negotiated a recording
contract for Loretta Lynn, who signed to Decca in 1961 and remained with the
label for over 25 years. Lynn was known as the "Decca Doll" until she became
better known as the "Coal Miner's Daughter." Lynn also signed a lifetime
contract in 1966. She was the biggest selling female country artist of the
1960s and 70s.

MCA Nashville reactivated the Decca label in the US, as a subsidiary, in 1994.
Mark Chesnutt was transferred to Decca from MCA Nashville, while Dawn Sears
was the first new act signed.[28] Other artists signed to the revived label
included Rhett Akins, Lee Ann Womack, Gary Allan, Carl Perkins and Dolly
Parton. With the decline in the genre's popularity and the contraction taking
place in the industry during the late 1990s, MCA Nashville closed the Decca
subsidiary in early 1999 shortly after UMG's purchase of PolyGram. Chesnutt,
Womack and Allan were shifted to the MCA Nashville roster, while all other
Decca artists were released.

In 2008, independent of UMG's Nashville operations, the Decca Music Group
signed Country act One Flew South to the label. One album was released before
the group departed. In the UK, Decca has signed several country acts in recent
years including Nathan Carter, Lucie Silvas, Imelda May, Andy Brown, Una
Healy, The Wandering Hearts and The Shires.

Full frequency range recording (ffrr) was a spin-off devised by Arthur
Haddy[29] of British Decca's development, during the Second World War, of a
high fidelity hydrophone capable of detecting and cataloguing individual
German submarines by each one's signature engine noise, and enabled a greatly
enhanced frequency range (high and low notes) to be captured on
recordings.[30] Critics regularly commented on the startling realism of the
new Decca recordings. The frequency range of ffrr was 80–15000 Hz, with a
signal-to-noise ratio of 60 dB. While Decca's early ffrr releases on 78-rpm
discs had some noticeable surface noise, which diminished the effects of the
high fidelity sound, the introduction of long-playing records in 1949 made
better use of the new technology and set an industry standard that was quickly
imitated by Decca's competitors. Nonetheless titles first issued on 78rpm
remained in that form in the Decca catalogues into the early 1950s. The ffrr
technique became internationally accepted and considered a standard. The
Ernest Ansermet recording of Stravinsky's _Petrushka_ was key in the
development of full frequency range records and alerting the listening public
to high fidelity in 1946.[31]

The long-playing record was launched in the US in 1948 by Columbia Records
(not connected with the British company of the same name at the time). It
enabled recordings to play for up to half an hour without a break, compared
with the 3 to 5 minutes playing time of the existing records. The new records
were made of vinyl (the old discs were made of brittle shellac), which enabled
the ffrr recordings to be transferred to disc very realistically. In 1949, in
both the UK and the US, Decca took up the LP promptly and enthusiastically[2]
giving the British arm an enormous advantage over EMI, which for some years
tried to stick exclusively to the old format, thereby forfeiting competitive
advantage to Decca, both artistically and financially.

British Decca recorded high fidelity versions of all the symphonies of Ralph
Vaughan Williams except for the ninth, under the personal supervision of the
composer, with Sir Adrian Boult and the London Philharmonic Orchestra.
Benjamin Britten conducted recordings of many of his compositions for Decca,
from the 1940s to the 1970s; most of these recordings have been reissued on
CD.

The British Decca recording engineers Arthur Haddy, Roy Wallace and Kenneth
Wilkinson developed in 1954 the famous Decca tree, a stereo microphone
recording system for big orchestras.

Decca started the first actual stereophonic recording 13–28 May 1954, at
Victoria Hall, Geneva, the first European record company to do so; only two
months before, RCA Victor had begun the first actual stereophonic recording in
the U.S., 6–8 March 1954. Decca archives show that Ernest Ansermet and the
Orchestre de la Suisse Romande recorded _Antar_ by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov
(Decca's official first actual stereo recording); _Stenka Razin_ by Alexander
Glazunov; _Tamara_ by Mily Balakirev; Anatoly Liadov's _Baba-Yaga_ , _Eight
Russian Folksongs_ , _Kikimora_ ; and _Le Martyre de saint Sébastien_ by
Claude Debussy. These performances were initially issued only in monaural
sound; and in 1959, the stereo version of _Le Martyre de saint Sébastien_ was
issued only in the U.S. as London OSA 1104 (OS 25108); and stereo versions of
others were finally issued from the late 1960s to the beginning of the 1970s
as part of the ""Decca Eclipse"" series (in the UK) or "Stereo Treasury"
series (in the U.S. on the London label).[32]

The Decca stereo format was called (in succession to ffrr) "ffss", i.e. "full
frequency stereophonic sound". With most competitors not using stereo until
1957, the new technique was a distinctive feature of Decca. Even after stereo
became standard and into the 1970s, Decca boasted a special, spectacular sound
quality, characterised by aggressive use of the highest and lowest
frequencies, daring use of tape saturation and out-of-phase sound to convey a
lively and impactful hall ambiance, plus considerable bar-to-bar rebalancing
by the recording staff of orchestral voices, known as "spotlighting". In the
1960s and 1970s, the company developed its "Phase 4" process which produced
even greater sonic impact through even more interventionist engineering
techniques. Big-band leader Ted Heath was an early pioneer of the Decca "Phase
4" sound. Decca recorded some quadrophonic masters that were released in
Sansui's quadraphonic system called QS Regular Matrix.

Starting in late 1978, British Decca developed their own digital audio
recorders used in-house for recording, mixing, editing, and mastering albums.
Each recorder consisted of a modified IVC model 826P open-reel 1-inch VTR,
connected to a custom codec unit with time code capability (using a
proprietary time code developed by Decca), as well as outboard DAC and ADC
units connected to the codec unit. The codec recorded audio to tape in 18 bits
linear PCM at 48 kHz, with a maximum of eight channels. Later versions of the
system used 20-bit recording. With the exception of the IVC VTRs (which were
modified to Decca's specifications by IVC's UK division in Reading), all the
electronics for these systems were developed and manufactured in-house by
Decca (and by contractors to them as well). These digital systems were used
for mastering most of Decca's classical music releases to both LP and CD, and
were used well into the late 1990s. After the start of the new century, Decca
became actively involved in pioneering a new generation of high-resolution and
multi-channel recordings, including "Super Audio CD" (SACD) and "DVD-Audio"
(DVD-A) formats. Decca is now routinely mastering new recordings in these
formats.

Decca Special Products developed a number of products for the audio
marketplace. These include:

Decca Special Products was spun off, and is now known as London Decca.

The American branch of Decca also marketed its own line of home audio
equipment.[33]

American Decca bought Universal-International in 1952, and eventually merged
with MCA Inc. in 1962, becoming a subsidiary company under MCA. Dissatisfied
with American Decca's promotion of British Decca recordings and because
American Decca held the rights to the name Decca in the US and Canada, British
Decca sold its records in the United States and Canada under the label
**London Records** beginning in 1947. In Britain, London Records became a
mighty catch-all licensing label for foreign recordings from the nascent post-
WW II American independent and semi-major labels such as Cadence, Dot, Chess,
Atlantic, Imperial and Liberty.

Conversely, British Decca retained a non-reciprocal right to licence and issue
American Decca recordings in the UK on their Brunswick (US Decca recordings)
and Coral (US Brunswick and Coral recordings) labels; this arrangement
continued until 1967 when a UK branch of MCA was established utilising the MCA
Records label, with distribution fluctuating between British Decca and other
English companies over time.

In Canada, the Compo Company was reorganised into MCA Records (Canada) in
1970.[35]

The Decca name was dropped by MCA in America in 1973 in favour of the MCA
Records label. The first-run American Decca label went out with a big bang
with its final release, "Drift Away" by Dobie Gray in 1973 (label No. 33057),
reaching No. 5 on the _Billboard_ chart and receiving gold record status.

PolyGram acquired the remains of Decca UK within days of Sir Edward Lewis's
death in January 1980. British Decca's pop catalogue was taken over by Polydor
Records. Ironically, PolyGram descended from British Decca's former Dutch
distributor Hollandsche Decca Distributie.

In Taiwan, PolyGram acquired 60% of Linfair Magnetic Sound (founded in 1961)
in 1992, and renamed to Decca Records Taiwan. The name remains until 2002,
when it decided to sell its 60 percent stake, and changed its name to Linfair
Records, making the company independent from Universal Music. In addition to
Decca label, Linfair Records also distribute V2 Records' releases, and some
independent labels. However, Linfair Records' releases outside Taiwan will
continue to be released internationally via Universal Music.

The Decca label is currently in use by Universal Music Group worldwide; this
is possible because Universal Studios (which officially dropped the MCA name
after the Seagram buyout in 1996) acquired PolyGram, British Decca's parent
company in 1998, thus consolidating Decca trademark ownership. In the US, the
Decca country music label was shut down and the London classical label was
renamed as it was able to use the Decca name for the first time because of the
merger that created Universal Music. In 1999, Decca absorbed Philips Records
to create the Decca Music Group (half of Universal Music Classics Group in the
US, with Deutsche Grammophon being the other half).

Today, Decca is a leading label for both classical music and Broadway scores
although it is branching out into pop music from established recording stars:
in 2007 its _Motown: A Journey Through Hitsville USA_ by Boyz II Men reached
No. 27 on the Billboard Top 200 Albums chart. In 2007 they won the race to
sign English teen jazz sensation Victoria Hart and released her first album
_Whatever Happened to Romance_ in July.[36] In December 2007, it was announced
that Morrissey would be joining the Decca roster. In August 2009, it was
revealed that American Idol alum, Clay Aiken, had signed with Decca.[37] It
reentered the American country music scene in 2008. There are two Universal
Music label groups now using the Decca name. The Decca Label Group is the US
label whereas the London-based Decca Music Group runs the international
classical and pop releases by such world-famous performers as Andrea Bocelli
and Hayley Westenra. The London Records pop label that was established in the
UK in 1990, run by Roger Ames, and distributed by PolyGram became part of WEA
in 2000 when he was hired to run that company.

It is also the distributing label of POINT Music, a joint venture between
Universal and Philip Glass's Euphorbia Productions that folded shortly after
the merger that created Universal Music. Ironically, the American Decca
classical music catalogue is managed by sister Universal label Deutsche
Grammophon. They include the recordings of guitarist Andrés Segovia.[38]
Before Deutsche Grammophon founded its own American branch in 1969, it had a
distribution deal with American Decca until 1962 when distribution switched to
MGM Records.[39] Éditions de l'Oiseau-Lyre is a wholly owned subsidiary
specialising in European classical music of the 15th to 19th centuries.
American Decca's jazz catalogue is managed by GRP Records, an imprint of Verve
Records. The American Decca rock/pop catalogue is managed by Geffen Records.
American distribution of British Decca's rock/pop catalogue is handled by
Mercury Records. The Decca Broadway imprint is used for both newly recorded
musical theatre songs and Universal Music Group's vast catalogues of musical
theatre recordings from record labels UMG and predecessor companies acquired
over the years.

On 10 January 2011, Universal Music Group, which owns the masters to Decca
Records, announced that it was donating 200,000 of its master recordings from
the 1920s to the 1940s to the United States Library of Congress. The
collection of master recordings will be cleaned and digitised. Included in
this group are Bing Crosby's original recording of 'White Christmas' and
thousands more by Louis Armstrong, Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, Judy
Garland, Tommy Dorsey, Jimmy Dorsey, the Andrews Sisters and other famous and
lesser-known musicians who recorded during this time period. Because of this
transaction, once the Library has organised and cleaned the collection, the
public will eventually have some degree of access to thousands of recordings
that have been commercially unavailable for decades. According to the _Los
Angeles Times_ , "[a]s part of the agreement between UMG and the library,
Universal retains ownership of the recording copyrights and the right to
exploit the cleaned-up and digitized files for commercial purposes."[40]

Today, Decca distributes UMG's jazz holdings led by Blue Note Records and
Verve Records along with the classical music holdings led by Decca Classics,
Philips Records and Deutsche Grammophon. They also distribute recordings from
the Concord Music Group and Rounder Records.[41]

The following matrix prefixes were used by Decca:[42]

**Key**

**Selected affiliated labels**

**Personnel and staff**

