**Denglisch** is a pejorative term used in German describing the increased use
of anglicisms and pseudo-anglicisms in the German language. It is a
portmanteau of the German words _Deutsch_ ( _German_ ) and _Englisch_. The
term is first recorded from 1965.[1]

The word has been adopted in English in an Anglicised form as **Denglish** ,
recorded from 1996.[2]

The term is used in all German-speaking countries to refer to the increasingly
strong influx of English or pseudo-English vocabulary (and other features of
the language such as grammar and orthography) into German.[3] The standard
German reference work _Duden_ defines it as "a pejorative term for German with
too many English expressions mixed in."[4]

Other sources use words with aggressive, hostile, or negative connotations to
describe it such as "a persistent infiltration",[5] an "invasion",
"onslaught", or "attack",[6][7] or that it is "corrupting the language"[8] or
is an "infectious disease".[9]

The term itself is not a standard German word, but an informal portmanteau of
_Deutsch_ \+ _English_ , and gives the same kind of impression in German, as
the word _Spanglish_ has in English: i.e., it is well-understood, but it is an
informal word for which there is no common equivalent in standard language
use.[ _citation needed_ ]

Other slang terms in German which refer to the same phenomenon include:
_McDeutsch_ ("McGerman"), _Dummdeutsch_ ("dumb German"), _Dönerdeutsch_ (kebab
German).[9]:308

In English there are numerous colloquial portmanteau words. One set is based
on the word _Deutsch_. These include (chronologically) _Deutschlisch_ (first
recorded in 1970), _Deutlish_ (1977), _Deutschlish_ (1979) and _Dinglish_
(1990).[10] Another set of terms is based on the word _German_. These include
(chronologically) _Germenglish_ (first recorded 1936), _Germanglish_ (1967),
_Gerglish_ (1968), _Germish_ (1972), _Germlish_ (1974), _Genglish_ (1977),
_Ginglish_ (1989), _Germinglish_ (1996), and _Gernglish_ (1996).[11]

Some influence of English on German is expected as part of normal language
contact. The term _Denglisch_ refers to excessive use of anglicisms or pseudo-
anglicisms in German.

The introduction of anglicisms, especially in marketing and business
terminology, peaked during the 1990s and the early 2000s. Since then, the
ubiquity of the practice has made it much less fashionable or prestigious, and
several commentators have argued against it. _Zeit Online_ (whose title is
itself an example of the prevalence of anglicisms in German IT terminology)
criticized the ubiquitous use of English in a 2007 article.[4] Although the
article acknowledged the risks of excessive linguistic purism, it condemned
the fashion of labeling information desks at train stations, formerly simply
known as _Auskunft_ , with the anglicism _Service Point_. The choice of the
pseudo-anglicism _Brain up!_ by then-minister for education Edelgard Bulmahn
as a campaign slogan in 2004 was highlighted as an extreme case by Die
Zeit.[12] _Frankfurter Allgemeine_ satirized this choice at the time of its
introduction,[13] and later wrote that even the English-speaking sphere was
mocking "German linguistic submissiveness".[14]

Words and expressions labeled as Denglisch can come from various sources,
including loanwords, calques, anglicisms, pseudo-anglicisms, or adoption of
non-native grammar, syntax, or spelling.

German vocabulary has numerous cases of English loanwords now fully
"naturalized" as German words, including full inflection. English had only
very limited influence on German before the mid-19th century. Such loanwords
as there are mostly concern nautical vocabulary, loaned into Low German (e.g.
_tank_ , ultimately from Indo-Aryan; _Tanker_ ( _tanker (ship)_ ) is early
20th century).

In the 19th century, it was still more common to use loan translation for the
vocabulary of industrialisation ( _Dampfmaschine_ for "steam engine",
_Pferdestärke_ for "horse power", etc.). To some extent, this continued in the
early 20th century: _Wolkenkratzer_ for "skyscraper", _Kaugummi_ for "chewing
gum", _Flutlicht_ for "flood light", _Fernsehen_ for "television".

English loanwords became more common in the early 20th century. A notable
example from this period is _Test_ (ultimately from Old French _test_ "earthen
pot"). _Test_ was compatible both with German phonology and orthography so its
nature as a loan is not evident.

Early loanwords (19th to early 20th century) often describe garments or
foodstuffs: _Jumper_ (19th century), _Curry_ (19th century loan from English,
ultimately from Tamil), _Pyjama_ (early 20th century loan from English
_pyjamas_ , ultimately from Urdu), _Trenchcoat_ (1920s). Other loanwords are
_boykottieren_ "to boycott" (1890s) and _Star_.

Direct influence of English, especially via US pop culture, became far more
pronounced after the end of World War II, with the Allied occupation of
Germany and later by association with 1960s to 1970s US counterculture: _Jeep_
, _Quiz_ , _Show_ , _Western_ , _Rock_ , _Hippie_ , _Groupie_.

The newest and most prolific wave of anglicisms arose after 1989 with the end
of the Cold War and the surge of the "Anglo-Saxon" smack of economic
liberalism in continental Europe and the associated business jargon ("CEO"
became extremely fashionable in German, replacing traditional terms such as
_Direktor_ , _Geschäftsführer_ , _Vorsitzender_ during the 1990s). At the same
time, the rapid development of information technology pushed many technical
terms from that field into everyday language.

Many of the more recent loans have developed in the spoken language and are
still clearly felt to be English words, so their English orthography is
retained in written communication, which leads to awkward spellings combining
German morphemes with English word stems, as in ge _boot_ et ("booted up" of a
computer) or _gecrasht_ or _gecrashed_ ("crashed", of a computer),
_downgeloadet_ , _gedownloadet_ or _gedownloaded_ ("downloaded"). They also
retain English phonology in many cases, including phonemes that do not exist
in Standard German (such as the /eɪ/ in "upd _a_ te").

A pseudo-anglicism is a word in another language that is formed from English
elements and may appear to be English, but that does not exist as an English
word.[15][16][17]

Another form of Denglisch consists of calques of popular English expressions
which replace German words and idioms. Common examples are:

Although this is considered incorrect by many native speakers as it violates
German grammar, it can be found even in German newspapers.[24]

Another phenomenon is the usage of the possessive construction _'s_ (generally
used in English but also correct in German in sunder cases), often called
_Deppenapostroph_ or _Idiotenapostroph_ ("Idiot's apostrophe" or "Idiot's
inverted comma") instead of the traditional German constructions. For example,
a Denglisch speaker might write _Wikipedia's Gestaltung_ ("Wikipedia's
design") instead of either _Wikipedias Gestaltung_ or _die Gestaltung der
Wikipedia_. Less often, it is used incorrectly to mark a plural (Greengrocers'
apostrophe); cf. a similar construction in Dutch:

or for adverbial expressions, such as

Denglisch may combine words according to English rules by writing them in
succession. According to the Standard German grammar and spelling rules, that
is incorrect.

The first spelling, with two separate words, makes no logical or grammatical
connection between the words but simply juxtaposes them. The second combines
them into one word, an _Annahme_ (in this case a place where something is
received) for _Reparaturen_ (repairs). That is often called _Deppenleerstelle_
, or _Deppenleerzeichen_ which means _idiot's space_ , incorrectly separating
parts of a compound word.

Many words are taken over as is from English, with little or no change in
spelling even if it doesn't fit the German orthographic system. One German
source laments the presence of Denglisch as an "infectious disease" of "raging
anglicitis" in the German language, which manifests as a kind of "hybrid
communications medium". It gives as examples the words _events_ , _economy_ ,
_performance_ , _entertainment_ , or _electronic cash_[a] appearing in
German.[9]

Some major companies such as Deutsche Bank now conduct much of their business
in English, while several departments of the major German telephone company
Deutsche Telekom were known as "T-Home" (formerly "T-Com"), "T-Mobile",
"T-Online", and "T-Systems".

Reinventing titles for English-language films dubbed into German was once a
common practice so, for example, Paul Landres's 1958 Western _Man from God's
Country_ became _Männer, die in Stiefeln sterben_ (ie. _Men Who Die with Their
Boots on._ ), while Raoul Walsh's 1941 film _They Died with Their Boots On_
became _Sein letztes Kommando_ ( _His Last Command_ ) or _Der Held des
Westens_ ( _The Hero of the West_ ). Most current American film titles are no
longer translated into German, ( _Ice Age_ ) although they still often receive
German appendages like _Prometheus – Dunkle Zeichen_ ( _Prometheus – Dark
Signs_ ) or include puns not present in the original title, such as _Clerks –
Die Ladenhüter_ for _Clerks – The Shelf-Warmers_. Menus of many global fast
food chains also usually go partly or completely untranslated: "Double Whopper
(formally: _Doppel-Whopper_ ) mit leckerem Bacon und Cheddar Cheese."

Advertising agencies in German-speaking countries have such a need for skills
in English that they want ads for new employees to contain plain English such
as "Join us".[26] KFC Germany's recruitment slogan is "I Am for Real", and its
website shows very heavy use of English coupled with nonstandard German.[27]

German commercials or, more often, written advertisements are likely to use
many English terms:

The verb "downloaden" is alleged to have been coined by Microsoft, as there is
a native, common German word (" _herunterladen_ "). Microsoft Windows Update
uses the phrase " _Downloaden Sie die neuesten Updates_ " ("Download the
latest updates") instead of the standard " _Laden Sie die neuesten
Aktualisierungen herunter_ ". The latest interface guidelines suggest that the
term " _herunterladen_ " should be used again because many users complained.
However, _Aktualisierungen_ (unlike _herunterladen_ ) would not be idiomatic
German in this usage or would at least have to be explained as
_Softwareaktualisierungen_ or _Programmaktualisierungen_ , the former
involving the new Anglicism "Software".

The use of (" _Handy_ ") has its roots in a commercial name, too. It is
related to the handheld Walkie-talkie, a commercial name for the two-way radio
transceiver to be transported in a bag, later in hands and so called ("Handie-
talkie"). A correct translation could be (" _Handsprechfunkgerät_ "). Germans
used to cite the word (" _Handy_ ") as an example of Denglisch.

Advertising in the field of personal hygiene tends to use much English:

The same applies to detergents:

Larger national and international companies based in Germany also use English
to describe their services. The television broadcaster ProSieben uses the
slogan "We love to entertain you" while Zurich Financial Services advertise
with the slogan "Because change happens". The fastest trains run by the German
state-owned railway system Deutsche Bahn (German Rail) are named "IC" and
"ICE", abbreviations of "Inter City" and "Inter City Express", while
information booths are named _ServicePoints_ , first-class waiting areas are
referred to as _Lounges_ ,[28] and words like _Kundendienst_ (customer
service) and _Fahrkarte_ (ticket) are quickly losing out to their respective
English counterparts. As an official stance against this rampant use of
Denglisch, the Deutsche Bahn in June 2013 issued a directive and glossary of
2200 Anglicisms that should be replaced by their German counterparts.[29]

Sometimes such neologisms also use CamelCase, as in the Deutsche Telekom's
newest rates called "Fulltime", "Freetime", "Call Plus" and "Call Time"
offering additionally such features as "CountrySelect". They do not even
refrain from offering services at certain 'Callshops', using both languages by
building a German-style compound, capitalizing it and using two English words
in a new context. It has become common for travel agencies to offer "last
minute" bookings or manufacturers to adopt "just in time"; perhaps driven by
international commerce and economic interests.

The phrase "Test it" is increasingly common as an English phrase idiosyncratic
to German, meaning roughly "Try it out". That is thought to have originated
with advertising copy for West cigarettes, exhorting consumers to "Test The
West".

**Notes**

**References**

