**Deutsche Telekom AG** (German pronunciation: [ˌdɔʏtʃə ˈteːləkɔm ʔaːˌɡeː]
(![About this
sound](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Loudspeaker.svg/11px-
Loudspeaker.svg.png)listen); short form in writing only: **DT** ; stylised as
**·T···** ) is a German telecommunications company headquartered in Bonn and
by revenue the largest telecommunications provider in Europe. Deutsche Telekom
was formed in 1996, as the former state-owned monopoly Deutsche Bundespost was
privatised. The company operates several subsidiaries worldwide, including the
mobile communications brand T-Mobile.

As of September 2019, the German government holds a 14.5% stake in company
stock directly, and another 17.4% through the government bank KfW.[4] The
company is a component of the Euro Stoxx 50 stock market index.[5]20£

The Deutsche Bundespost was the federal German government postal
administration created in 1947 as a successor to the Reichspost. It was also
the major telephone company in West Germany.

On 1 July 1989, as part of a post office reform, Deutsche Bundespost was split
into three entities, one being Deutsche Telekom. On 1 January 1995, as part of
another reform, Deutsche Bundespost Telekom became Deutsche Telekom AG, and
was privatized in 1996. As such, it shares a common heritage with the other
privatized Deutsche Bundespost companies, Deutsche Post (DHL) and Deutsche
Postbank.[6][7]

Deutsche Telekom was the monopoly Internet service provider (ISP) for the
German Internet until its privatization in 1995, and the dominant ISP
thereafter.[8] Until the early 21st century, Deutsche Telekom controlled
almost all Internet access by individuals and small businesses in Germany, as
they were one of the first German telecom units.[8]

On 6 December 2001, Deutsche Telekom became the first official partner of the
2006 FIFA World Cup.[9]

On 1 January 2005, Deutsche Telekom implemented a new company structure. The
two organizational business units of T-Com and T-Online were merged into the
Broadband/Fixed Network (BBFN) strategic business unit (T-Online merged with
parent Deutsche Telekom in 2006). It provides around 40 million narrowband
lines, over 9 million broadband lines and has 14 million registered Internet
customers.

In 2008, the structure was changed again. T-Online was separated from Deutsche
Telekom, and merged with T-Com to form the new unit T-Home. In September 2010,
Orange parent France Télécom and T-Mobile parent Deutsche Telekom merged their
operations in the United Kingdom to create the largest mobile network in
Britain, EE.[10]

In April 2010, T-Mobile was merged with T-Home to form Telekom Deutschland
GmbH. This unit now handles all products and services aimed at private
customers. In October 2012, Deutsche Telekom and Orange created a 50-50% joint
venture named BuyIn for regrouping their procurement operations and benefiting
from economies of scale.[11]

In April 2013, T-Mobile US and MetroPCS merged their operations in the United
States.[12] In February 2014, Deutsche Telekom acquired the remaining parts of
its T-Mobile Czech Republic division for around €800 million. The size of the
remaining stake was numbered at 40 percent.[13]

In December 2014, it was announced that Deutsche Telekom were in talks with BT
Group on the acquisition of EE, and part of the deal was to provide Deutsche
Telekom a 12% stake and a seat on the board in the BT Group upon
completion.[14][15] BT Group announced agreement in February 2015 to acquire
EE for £12.5 billion[16] and received regulatory approval from the Competition
and Markets Authority on 15 January 2016.[17] The transaction was completed on
29 January 2016.[18]

In February 2016, at the Mobile World Congress, in Barcelona, Deutsche Telekom
jointly launched the Telecom Infra Project (TIP) with Intel, Nokia, Facebook,
Equinix, SK Telecom, and others, which builds on the Open Compute Project
model to accelerate innovation in the telecom industry.[19]

For the fiscal year 2017, Deutsche Telekom reported earnings of EUR€3.5
billion, with an annual revenue of EUR€74.9 billion, an increase of 2.5% over
the previous fiscal cycle.[20] Deutsche Telekom's shares traded at over €14
per share, and its market capitalization was valued at US€68.4 billion in
November 2018.[21]

Deutsche Telekom also holds substantial shares in other telecom companies,
including Central European subsidiaries Slovak Telekom (Slovakia), Magyar
Telekom (Hungary). Furthermore, Magyar Telekom holds majority shares in
Makedonski Telekom (North Macedonia), and Hrvatski Telekom (Croatia) holds
majority shares in Crnogorski Telekom (Montenegro).

DT also holds shares in the Hellenic telecommunication operator OTE, which
also have shares in several other companies like the mobile operators Telekom
Albania, Telekom Romania and the IT&C retailer Germanos. Deutsche Telekom also
operates a wholesale division named International Carrier Sales & Solutions
(ICSS) that provides white label voice and data solutions to large carriers
including T-Mobile.[22][23]

Operation of telephone companies involves billing-software or "BSS". Deutsche
Telekom`s T-Mobile billing was performed on Israeli-backend systems until
2014, when Ericsson was selected to replace the Israeli-backend.

  

Formerly known as Deutsche Telekom International Sales and Solutions. It is an
international wholesale arm of Deutsche Telekom. The products include Voice
Termination, Ethernet, IP-Transit, Mobile and Roaming as well as In-flight
Internet Access for aviation industry. It operates a Tier-1 network.

Together with Inmarsat and Nokia, Deutsche Telekom develops a hybrid-network
for faster internet access on board the planes in Europe. It is a combination
of data transmission via Inmarsat Satellite and Deutsche Telekom's LTE ground
stations throughout the European continent.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-
Commons-logo.svg.png) Media related to Deutsche Telekom at Wikimedia Commons

