Coordinates: 50°6′50″N 8°40′7″E﻿ / ﻿50.11389°N 8.66861°E﻿ / 50.11389; 8.66861

**Deutsche Bank AG** (German pronunciation: [ˈdɔʏ̯t͡ʃə ˈbaŋk aːˈgeː] (![About
this
sound](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Loudspeaker.svg/11px-
Loudspeaker.svg.png)listen)) is a German multinational investment bank and
financial services company headquartered in Frankfurt, Germany.

The bank is operational in 58 countries with a large presence in Europe, the
Americas and Asia.[4] As of April 2018, Deutsche Bank is the 17th largest bank
in the world by total assets.[5] As the largest German banking institution in
the world, it is a component of the DAX stock market index.

The company is a universal bank resting on three pillars – the Private &
Commercial Bank, the Corporate & Investment Bank (CIB) and Asset Management
(DWS). Its investment banking operations often command substantial deal flow
and maintain different "sell side" and "buy side" departments.

Deutsche Bank was founded in Berlin in 1870 as a specialist bank for financing
foreign trade and promoting German exports.[6][7] It subsequently played a
large part in developing Germany's industry, as its business model focused on
providing finance to industrial customers.[7] The bank's statute was adopted
on 22 January 1870, and on 10 March 1870 the Prussian government granted it a
banking licence. The statute laid great stress on foreign business:

The object of the company is to transact banking business of all kinds, in
particular to promote and facilitate trade relations between Germany, other
European countries and overseas markets.[8]

Three of the founders were Georg Siemens, whose father's cousin had founded
Siemens and Halske, Adelbert Delbrück and Ludwig Bamberger.[9] Previous to the
founding of Deutsche Bank, German importers and exporters were dependent upon
British and French banking institutions in the world markets—a serious
handicap in that German bills were almost unknown in international commerce,
generally disliked and subject to a higher rate of discount than English or
French bills.[10]

The bank's first domestic branches, inaugurated in 1871 and 1872, were opened
in Bremen[11] and Hamburg.[12] Its first foray overseas came shortly
afterwards, in Shanghai (1872)[13] and London (1873)[14] followed sometime by
South America (1874–1886).[9] The branch opening in London, after one failure
and another partially successful attempt, was a prime necessity for the
establishment of credit for the German trade in what was then the world's
money centre.[10]

Major projects in the early years of the bank included the Northern Pacific
Railroad in the US[15] and the Baghdad Railway[16] (1888). In Germany, the
bank was instrumental in the financing of bond offerings of steel company
Krupp (1879) and introduced the chemical company Bayer to the Berlin stock
market.

The second half of the 1890s saw the beginning of a new period of expansion at
Deutsche Bank. The bank formed alliances with large regional banks, giving
itself an entrée into Germany's main industrial regions. Joint ventures were
symptomatic of the concentration then under way in the German banking
industry. For Deutsche Bank, domestic branches of its own were still something
of a rarity at the time; the Frankfurt branch[17] dated from 1886 and the
Munich branch from 1892, while further branches were established in Dresden
and Leipzig[18] in 1901.

In addition, the bank rapidly perceived the value of specialist institutions
for the promotion of foreign business. Gentle pressure from the Foreign
Ministry played a part in the establishment of Deutsche Ueberseeische Bank[19]
in 1886 and the stake taken in the newly established Deutsch-Asiatische
Bank[20] three years later, but the success of those companies in showed that
their existence made sound commercial sense.

The immediate postwar period was a time of liquidations. Having already lost
most of its foreign assets, Deutsche Bank was obliged to sell other holdings.
A great deal of energy went into shoring up what had been achieved. But there
was new business, too, some of which was to have an impact for a long time to
come. The bank played a significant role in the establishment of the film
production company, UFA, and the merger of Daimler and Benz.

The bank merged with other local banks in 1929 to create Deutsche Bank und
DiscontoGesellschaft, at that point the biggest ever merger in German banking
history. Increasing costs were one reason for the merger. Another was the
trend towards concentration throughout the industry in the 1920s. The merger
came at just the right time to help counteract the emerging world economic and
banking crisis. In 1937, the company name changed back to Deutsche Bank.

The crisis was, in terms of its political impact, the most disastrous economic
event of the century. The shortage of liquidity that paralyzed the banks was
fuelled by a combination of short-term foreign debt and borrowers no longer
able to pay their debts, while the inflexibility of the state exacerbated the
situation. For German banks, the crisis in the industry was a watershed. A
return to circumstances that might in some ways have been considered
reminiscent of the "golden age" before World War I was ruled out for many
years.

After Adolf Hitler came to power, instituting the Third Reich, Deutsche Bank
dismissed its three Jewish board members in 1933. In subsequent years,
Deutsche Bank took part in the aryanization of Jewish-owned businesses;
according to its own historians, the bank was involved in 363 such
confiscations by November 1938.[21] During the war, Deutsche Bank incorporated
other banks that fell into German hands during the occupation of Eastern
Europe. Deutsche Bank provided banking facilities for the Gestapo and loaned
the funds used to build the Auschwitz camp and the nearby IG Farben
facilities.[22]

During World War II, Deutsche Bank became responsible for managing the
Bohemian Union Bank in Prague, with branches in the Protectorate and in
Slovakia, the Bankverein in Yugoslavia (which has now been divided into two
financial corporations, one in Serbia and one in Croatia), the Albert de Barry
Bank in Amsterdam, the National Bank of Greece in Athens, the Creditanstalt-
Bankverein in Austria and Hungary, the Deutsch-Bulgarische Kreditbank in
Bulgaria, and Banca Comercială Română _(The Romanian Commercial Bank)_ in
Bucharest. It also maintained a branch in Istanbul, Turkey.

In 1999, Deutsche Bank confirmed officially that it had been involved in
Auschwitz.[22] In December 1999 Deutsche, along with other major German
companies, contributed to a US$5.2 billion compensation fund following
lawsuits brought by Holocaust survivors.[23][24] The history of Deutsche Bank
during the Second World War has since been documented by independent
historians commissioned by the Bank.[21]

Following Germany's defeat in World War II, the Allied authorities, in 1948,
ordered Deutsche Bank's break-up into ten regional banks. These 10 regional
banks were later consolidated into three major banks in 1952: Norddeutsche
Bank AG; Süddeutsche Bank AG; and Rheinisch-Westfälische Bank AG. In 1957,
these three banks merged to form Deutsche Bank AG with its headquarters in
Frankfurt.

In 1959, the bank entered retail banking by introducing small personal loans.
In the 1970s, the bank pushed ahead with international expansion, opening new
offices in new locations, such as Milan (1977), Moscow, London, Paris and
Tokyo. In the 1980s, this continued when the bank paid U$603 million in 1986
to acquire Banca d'America e d'Italia.[25]

In 1989, the first steps towards creating a significant investment-banking
presence were taken with the acquisition of Morgan, Grenfell & Co., a UK-based
investment bank. By the mid-1990s, the buildup of a capital-markets operation
had got under way with the arrival of a number of high-profile figures from
major competitors. Ten years after the acquisition of Morgan Grenfell, the US
firm Bankers Trust was added. Bankers Trust suffered major losses in the
summer of 1998 due to the bank having a large position in Russian government
bonds,[26] but avoided financial collapse by being acquired by Deutsche Bank
for $10 billion in November 1998.[27] This made Deutsche Bank the fourth-
largest money management firm in the world after UBS, Fidelity Investments,
and the Japanese post office's life insurance fund.[27] At the time, Deutsche
Bank owned a 12% stake in DaimlerChrysler but United States banking laws
prohibit banks from owning industrial companies, so Deutsche Bank received an
exception to this prohibition through 1978 legislation from Congress.[27]

Deutsche continued to build up its presence in Italy with the acquisition in
1993 of Banca Popolare di Lecco from Banca Popolare di Novara for about $476
million.[ _citation needed_ ] In 1999 it acquired a minority interest in Cassa
di Risparmio di Asti.

The Deutsche Bank Building in Lower Manhattan, formerly Bankers Trust Plaza,
was heavily damaged by the collapse of the South Tower of the World Trade
Center in the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.[28] Demolition work on
the 39-story building continued for nearly a decade, and was completed in
early 2011.[29]

In October 2001, Deutsche Bank was listed on the New York Stock Exchange. This
was the first NYSE listing after interruption due to 11 September attacks. The
following year, Josef Ackermann became CEO of Deutsche Bank and served as CEO
until 2012 when he became involved with the Bank of Cyprus.[30][31] Then,
beginning in 2002, Deutsche Bank strengthened its U.S. presence when it
purchased Scudder Investments. Meanwhile, in Europe, Deutsche Bank increased
its private-banking business by acquiring Rued Blass & Cie (2002) and the
Russian investment bank United Financial Group (2005) founded by the United
States banker Charles Ryan and the Russian official Boris Fyodorov which
followed Anshu Jain's aggressive expansion to gain strong relationships with
state partners in Russia.[32][33] Jain persuaded Ryan to remain with Deutsche
Bank at its new Russian offices and later, in April 2007, sent the President
and Chairman of the Management Board of VTB Bank Andrey Kostin's son Andrey to
Deutsche Bank's Moscow office.[32][34][a] Later, in 2008, to establish VTB
Capital, numerous bankers from Deutsche Bank's Moscow office were hired by VTB
Capital.[31][36][37] In Germany, further acquisitions of Norisbank, Berliner
Bank and Deutsche Postbank strengthened Deutsche Bank's retail offering in its
home market. This series of acquisitions was closely aligned with the bank's
strategy of bolt-on acquisitions in preference to so-called "transformational"
mergers. These formed part of an overall growth strategy that also targeted a
sustainable 25% return on equity, something the bank achieved in 2005.

The company's headquarters, the Deutsche Bank Twin Towers building, was
extensively renovated beginning in 2007. The renovation took approximately
three years to complete. The renovated building was certified LEED Platinum
and DGNB Gold.

The bank developed, owned and operated the Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas, after
the project's original developer defaulted on its borrowings. Deutsche Bank
opened the casino in 2010 and ran it at a loss until its sale in May 2014. The
bank's exposure at the time of sale was more than $4 billion, however it sold
the property to Blackstone Group for $1.73 billion.[38]

Deutsche Bank was one of the major drivers of the collateralized debt
obligation (CDO) market during the housing credit bubble from 2004 to 2008,
creating about $32 billion worth. The 2011 US Senate Permanent Select
Committee on Investigations report on Wall Street and the Financial Crisis
analyzed Deutsche Bank as a case study of investment banking involvement in
the mortgage bubble, CDO market, credit crunch, and recession. It concluded
that even as the market was collapsing in 2007, and its top global CDO trader
was deriding the CDO market and betting against some of the mortgage bonds in
its CDOs, Deutsche bank continued to churn out bad CDO products to
investors.[39]

The report focused on one CDO, Gemstone VII, made largely of mortgages from
Long Beach, Fremont, and New Century, all notorious subprime lenders. Deutsche
Bank put risky assets into the CDO, like ACE 2006-HE1 M10, which its own
traders thought was a bad bond. It also put in some mortgage bonds that its
own mortgage department had created but could not sell, from the DBALT 2006
series. The CDO was then aggressively marketed as a good product, with most of
it being described as having A level ratings. By 2009 the entire CDO was
almost worthless and the investors (including Deutsche Bank itself) had lost
most of their money.[39]

Greg Lippmann, head of global CDO trading, was betting against the CDO market,
with approval of management, even as Deutsche was continuing to churn out
product. He was a large character in Michael Lewis' book _The Big Short_ ,
which detailed his efforts to find 'shorts' to buy Credit Default Swaps for
the construction of Synthetic CDOs. He was one of the first traders to foresee
the bubble in the CDO market as well as the tremendous potential that CDS
offered in this. As portrayed in _The Big Short_ , Lipmann in the middle of
the CDO and MBS frenzy was orchestrating presentations to investors,
demonstrating his bearish view of the market, offering them the idea to start
buying CDS, especially to AIG in order to profit from the forthcoming
collapse. As regards the Gemstone VII deal, even as Deutsche was creating and
selling it to investors, Lippman emailed colleagues that it 'blew', and he
called parts of it 'crap' and 'pigs' and advised some of his clients to bet
against the mortgage securities it was made of. Lippman called the CDO market
a 'ponzi scheme', but also tried to conceal some of his views from certain
other parties because the bank was trying to sell the products he was calling
'crap'. Lippman's group made money off of these bets, even as Deutsche overall
lost money on the CDO market.[39]

Deutsche was also involved with Magnetar Capital in creating its first Orion
CDO. Deutsche had its own group of bad CDOs called START. It worked with
Elliot Advisers on one of them; Elliot bet against the CDO even as Deutsche
sold parts of the CDO to investors as good investments. Deutsche also worked
with John Paulson, of the Goldman Sachs Abacus CDO controversy, to create some
START CDOs. Deutsche lost money on START, as it did on Gemstone.[39]

On 3 January 2014 it was reported that Deutsche Bank would settle a lawsuit
brought by US shareholders, who had accused the bank of bundling and selling
bad real estate loans before the 2008 downturn. This settlement came
subsequent and in addition to Deutsche's $1.93 billion settlement with the US
Housing Finance Agency over similar litigation related to the sale of mortgage
backed securities to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.[40]

Former employees including Eric Ben-Artzi and Matthew Simpson have claimed
that during the crisis Deutsche failed to recognise up to $12bn of paper
losses on their $130bn portfolio of leveraged super senior trades, although
the bank rejects the claims.[41] A company document of May 2009 described the
trades as "the largest risk in the trading book",[42] and the whistleblowers
allege that had the bank accounted properly for its positions its capital
would have fallen to the extent that it might have needed a government
bailout.[41] One of them claims that "If Lehman Brothers didn't have to mark
its books for six months it might still be in business, and if Deutsche had
marked its books it might have been in the same position as Lehman."[42]

Deutsche had become the biggest operator in this market, which were a form of
credit derivative designed to behave like the most senior tranche of a
CDO.[42] Deutsche bought insurance against default by blue-chip companies from
investors, mostly Canadian pension funds, who received a stream of insurance
premiums as income in return for posting a small amount of collateral.[42] The
bank then sold protection to US investors via the CDX credit index, the spread
between the two was tiny but was worth $270m over the 7 years of the
trade.[42] It was considered very unlikely that many blue chips would have
problems at the same time, so Deutsche required collateral of just 10% of the
contract value.

The risk of Deutsche taking large losses if the collateral was wiped out in a
crisis was called the gap option.[42] Ben-Artzi claims that after modelling
came up with "economically unfeasible" results, Deutsche accounted for the gap
option first with a simple 15% "haircut" on the trades (described as
inadequate by another employee in 2006) and then in 2008 by a $1–2bn reserve
for the credit correlation desk designed to cover all risks, not just the gap
option.[42] In October 2008 they stopped modelling the gap option and just
bought S&P put options to guard against further market disruption, but one of
the whistleblowers has described this as an inappropriate hedge.[42] A model
from Ben-Artzi's previous job at Goldman Sachs suggested that the gap option
was worth about 8% of the value of the trades, worth $10.4bn. Simpson claims
that traders were not simply understating the gap option but actively
mismarking the value of their trades.[42]

Deutsche Bank has a negligible exposure to Greece. Spain and Italy however
account for a tenth of its European private and corporate banking business.
According to the bank's own statistics the credit risks in these countries are
about €18 billion (Italy) and €12 billion (Spain).[43]

For the 2008 financial year, Deutsche Bank reported its first annual loss in
five decades,[44] despite receiving billions of dollars from its insurance
arrangements with AIG, including US$11.8 billion from funds provided by US
taxpayers to bail out AIG.[45]

Based on a preliminary estimation from the European Banking Authority (EBA) in
October 2011, Deutsche Bank AG needed to raise capital of about €1.2 billion
(US$1.7 billion) as part of a required 9 percent core Tier 1 ratio after
sovereign debt writedown starting in mid-2012.[46]

It needs to get its common equity tier-1 capital ratio up to 12.5% in 2018 to
be marginally above the 12.25% required by regulators. As of September 2017 it
stands at 11.9%.[47]

In January 2014, Deutsche Bank reported a €1.2 billion ($1.6 billion) pre-tax
loss for the fourth quarter of 2013. This came after analysts had predicted a
profit of nearly €600 million, according to FactSet estimates. Revenues
slipped by 16% versus the prior year.[48]

Deutsche Bank's Capital Ratio Tier-1 (CET1) was reported in 2015 to be only
11.4%, lower than the 12% median CET1 ratio of Europe's 24 biggest publicly
traded banks, so there would be no dividend for 2015 and 2016.[49]
Furthermore, 15,000 jobs were to be cut.[50]

In June 2015, the then co-CEOs, Jürgen Fitschen and Anshu Jain, both offered
their resignations[51] to the bank's supervisory board, which were accepted.
Jain's resignation took effect in June 2015, but he provided consultancy to
the bank until January 2016. Fitschen continued as joint CEO until May 2016.
The appointment of John Cryan as joint CEO was announced, effective July 2016;
he became sole CEO at the end of Fitschen's term.[52]

In January 2016, Deutsche Bank pre-announced a 2015 loss before income taxes
of approximately €6.1 billion and a net loss of approximately €6.7
billion.[53] Following this announcement, a bank analyst at Citi declared: "We
believe a capital increase now looks inevitable and see an equity shortfall of
up to €7 billion, on the basis that Deutsche may be forced to book another €3
billion to €4 billion of litigation charges in 2016."[54]

Since May 2017, its biggest shareholder is Chinese conglomerate HNA Group,
which owns 10% of its shares.[55]

In November 2018, the bank had their Frankfurt offices raided by police in
connection with ongoing investigations around the Panama papers and money
laundering. Deutsche Bank released a statement confirming it would "cooperate
closely with prosecutors".[56]

AUTO1 FinTech is a joint venture of AUTO1 Group, Allianz and Deutsche
Bank.[57]

During the Annual General Meeting in May 2019, CEO Christian Sewing said he
was expecting a "deluge of criticism" about the bank's performance and
announced that he was ready to make "tough cutbacks"[58] after the failure of
merger negotiations with Commerzbank AG and weak profitability. According to
the New York Times, "its finances and strategy [are] in disarray and 95
percent of its market value [has been] erased".[59] News headlines in late
June 2019 claimed that the bank would cut 20,000 jobs, over 20% of its staff,
in a restructuring plan. [60][61] On 8 July 2019, the bank began to cut 18,000
jobs, including entire teams of equity traders in Europe, the US and Asia. On
the previous day, Sewing had laid blame on unnamed predecessors who created a
"culture of poor capital allocation" and chasing revenue for the sake of
revenue, according to a Financial Times report, and promised that going
forward, the bank "will only operate where we are competitive".[62][63][64]

When Deutsche Bank was first organized in 1870 there was no CEO. Instead the
board was represented by a speaker of the board. Beginning in February 2012
the bank has been led by two co-CEOs, and in July 2015 it announced it will be
led by one CEO from 2016.[65] The management bodies are the annual general
meeting, supervisory board and management board.

[ _citation needed_ ]

Deutsche Bank is one of the leading listed companies in German post-war
history. Its shares are traded on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange and, since
2001, also on the New York Stock Exchange and are included in various indices,
including the DAX and the Euro Stoxx 50. As the share had lost value since
mid-2015 and market capitalization had shrunk to around EUR 18 billion, it
temporarily withdrew from the Euro Stoxx 50 on August 8, 2016.[71] With a
0.73% stake, it is currently the company with the lowest index weighting.[72]

In 2001, Deutsche Bank merged its mortgage banking business with that of
Dresdner Bank and Commerzbank to form Eurohypo AG. In 2005, Deutsche Bank sold
its stake in the joint company to Commerzbank.[73]

The bank's business model rests on three pillars – the Corporate & Investment
Bank (CIB), the Private & Commercial Bank and Asset Management (DWS).

The Corporate & Investment Bank (CIB) is Deutsche Bank's capital markets
business. The CIB comprises the below six units.[75]

Deutsche Bank holds a majority stake in the listed asset manager DWS Group
(formerly Deutsche Asset Management), which was separated from the bank in
March 2018.

In 1972, the bank created the world-known blue logo "Slash in a Square" –
designed by Anton Stankowski and intended to represent growth within a risk-
controlled framework.[80]

Deutsche Bank in general as well as specific employees have frequently figured
in controversies and allegations of deceitful behavior or illegal
transactions. As of 2016, the bank was involved in some 7,800 legal disputes
and calculated €5.4 billion as litigation reserves,[81] with a further €2.2
billion held against other contingent liabilities.[54]

Six former employees were accused of being involved in a major tax fraud deal
with CO2 emission certificates, and most of them were subsequently convicted.
It was estimated that the sum of money in the tax evasion scandal might have
been as high as €850 million. Deutsche Bank itself was not convicted due to an
absence of corporate liability laws in Germany.[82]

From as late as 2001 to at least 2007, the bank engaged in covert espionage on
its critics. The bank has admitted to episodes of spying in 2001 and 2007
directed by its corporate security department, although characterizing them as
"isolated".[83] According to the Wall Street Journal's page one report,
Deutsche Bank had prepared a list of names of 20 people who it wished
investigated for criticism of the bank, including Michael Bohndorf (an
activist investor in the bank) and Leo Kirch (a former media executive in
litigation with bank).[83] Also targeted was the Munich law firm of Bub
Gauweiler & Partner, which represents Kirch. According to the Wall Street
Journal, the bank's legal department was involved in the scheme along with its
corporate security department.[83] The bank has since hired Cleary Gottlieb
Steen & Hamilton, a New York law firm, to investigate the incidents on its
behalf. The Cleary firm has concluded its investigation and submitted its
report, which however has not been made public.[83] According to the Wall
Street Journal, the Cleary firm uncovered a plan by which Deutsche Bank was to
infiltrate the Bub Gauweiler firm by having a bank "mole" hired as an intern
at the Bub Gauweiler firm. The plan was allegedly cancelled after the intern
was hired but before she started work.[83] Peter Gauweiler, a principal at the
targeted law firm, was quoted as saying "I expect the appropriate authorities
including state prosecutors and the bank's oversight agencies will conduct a
full investigation."[83]

In May 2009, Deutsche Bank informed the public that the executive management
had learned about possible violations which occurred in past years of the
bank's internal procedures or legal requirements in connection with activities
involving the bank's corporate security department. Deutsche Bank immediately
retained the law firm Cleary Gottlieb Steen & Hamilton in Frankfurt to conduct
an independent investigation[84] and informed the German Federal Financial
Supervisory Authority (BaFin). The principal findings by the law firm,
published in July 2009,[85] are as follows: Four incidents that raise legal
issues such as data protection or privacy concerns have been identified. In
all incidents, the activities arose out of certain mandates performed by
external service providers on behalf of the Bank's Corporate Security
Department. The incidents were isolated and no systemic misbehaviour has been
found. And there is no indication that present members of the Management Board
have been involved in any activity that raise legal issues or have had any
knowledge of such activities.[85] This has been confirmed by the Public
Prosecutor's Office in Frankfurt in October 2009.[86] Deutsche Bank has
informed all persons affected by the aforementioned activities and expressed
its sincere regrets. BaFin found deficiencies in operations within Deutsche
Bank's security unit in Germany but found no systemic misconduct by the
bank.[87] The bank has initiated steps to strengthen controls for the
mandating of external service providers by its Corporate Security Department
and their activities.[85]

In 2013, the CEOs Anshu Jain and Jürgen Fitschen as well as the major
shareholders of Deutsche Bank were awarded the Black Planet Award of the
Foundation Ethics & Economics (Ethecon Foundation).[88][89]

On 23 April 2015, Deutsche Bank agreed to a combined US$2.5 billion in fines –
a US$2.175 billion fine by American regulators, and a €227 million penalty by
British authorities – for its involvement in the Libor scandal uncovered in
June 2012. It was one of several banks described as colluding to fix interest
rates used to price hundreds of trillions of dollars of loans and contracts
worldwide, including mortgages and student loans.[90][91] Deutsche Bank also
pleaded guilty to wire fraud, acknowledging that at least 29 employees had
engaged in illegal activity. It will be required to dismiss all employees who
were involved with the fraudulent transactions.[91] However, no individuals
will be charged with criminal wrongdoing. In a Libor first, Deutsche Bank will
be required to install an independent monitor.[90] Commenting on the fine,
Britain's Financial Conduct Authority director Georgina Philippou said "This
case stands out for the seriousness and duration of the breaches ... One
division at Deutsche Bank had a culture of generating profits without proper
regard to the integrity of the market. This wasn't limited to a few
individuals but, on certain desks, it appeared deeply ingrained."[91] The fine
represented a record for interest rate related cases, eclipsing a $1.5 billion
Libor related fine to UBS, and the then-record $450 million fine assessed to
Barclays earlier in the case.[91][90] The size of the fine reflected the
breadth of wrongdoing at Deutsche Bank, the bank's poor oversight of traders,
and its failure to take action when it uncovered signs of abuse
internally.[90]

In January 2017, Deutsche Bank agreed to a $7.2 billion settlement with the
U.S. Department of Justice over its sale and pooling of toxic mortgage
securities in the years leading up to the 2008 financial crisis. As part of
the agreement, Deutsche Bank was required to pay a civil monetary penalty of
$3.1 billion and provide $4.1 billion in consumer relief, such as loan
forgiveness. At the time of the agreement, Deutsche Bank was still facing
investigations into the alleged manipulation of foreign exchange rates,
suspicious equities trades in Russia, as well as alleged violations of U.S.
sanctions on Iran and other countries. Since 2012, Deutsche Bank had paid more
than €12 billion for litigation, including a deal with U.S. mortgage-finance
giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.[92]

On 5 November 2015, Deutsche Bank was ordered to pay US$258 million (€237.2
million) in penalties imposed by the New York State Department of Financial
Services and the United States Federal Reserve Bank after the bank was caught
doing business with Burma, Libya, Sudan, Iran, and Syria which were under US
sanctions at the time. According to the US federal authorities, Deutsche Bank
handled 27,200 US dollar clearing transactions valued at more than US$10.86
billion (€9.98 billion) to help evade US sanctions between early 1999 until
2006 which are done on behalf of Iranian, Libyan, Syrian, Burmese, and
Sudanese financial institutions and other entities subject to US sanctions,
including entities on the Specially Designated Nationals by the Office of
Foreign Assets Control.[93][94]

In response to the penalties, the bank will pay US$200 million (€184 million)
to the NYDFS while the rest (US$58 million; €53.3 million) will go to the
Federal Reserve. In addition to the payment, the bank will install an
independent monitor, fire six employees who were involved in the incident, and
ban three other employees from any work involving the bank's US-based
operations.[95] The bank is still under investigation by the US Justice
Department and New York State Department of Financial Services into possible
sanctions violations relating to the 2014–15 Ukrainian crisis and its
activities within Russia.[96]

Environmentalists criticize Deutsche Bank for co-financing the controversial
Dakota Access Pipeline, which is planned to run close to an Indian reservation
and is seen as a threat to their livelihood by its inhabitants.[97][98]

Deutsche Bank has issued a statement addressing the critique received by
various environmental groups.[99]

In January 2017, the bank was fined $425 million by the New York State
Department of Financial Services (DFS)[100] and £163 million by the UK
Financial Conduct Authority[101] regarding accusations of laundering $10
billion out of Russia.[102][103][104]

Deutsche Bank is widely recognized as being the largest creditor to real-
estate-mogul-turned-politician Donald Trump, 45th President of the United
States, holding more than US$360 million in outstanding loans to the candidate
in the months prior to his 2016 election. As of December 2017[update] Deutsche
Bank’s role in, and possible relevance to, Trump and Russian parties
cooperating to elect him was reportedly under investigation by Robert Mueller
of the FBI.[105] As of March 2019[update], Deutsche Bank's relationship with
Trump was reportedly also under investigation by two U.S. congressional
committees and by the New York attorney general.[106][107]

In April 2019 House Democrats subpoenaed the Bank for Trump's personal and
financial records.[108][109][110][111][112] On 29 April 2019, President Donald
Trump, his children Donald Jr. Trump, Eric Trump and Ivanka Trump; and his
business sued Deutsche Bank and Capital One bank to block them from turning
over financial records to congressional committees that have issued subpoenas
for the information.[113] On May 22, 2019, judge Edgardo Ramos of the federal
District Court in Manhattan rejected the Trump suit against Deutsche Bank,
ruling the bank must comply with congressional subpoenas.[114] Six days later,
Ramos granted Trump’s attorneys their request for a stay so they could pursue
an expedited appeal through the courts.[115]

_The New York Times_ reported in May 2019 that anti-money laundering
specialists in the bank detected what appeared to be suspicious transactions
involving entities controlled by Trump and his son-in-law Jared Kushner, for
which they recommended filing suspicious activity reports with the Financial
Crimes Enforcement Network of the Treasury Department, but bank executives
rejected the recommendations. One specialist noted money moving from Kushner
Companies to Russian individuals and flagged it in part because of the bank's
previous involvement in a Russian money laundering scheme.[116][117]

Deutsche Bank lent money and traded currencies for the well-known sex offender
Jeffrey Epstein up to May 2019, long after Epstein's 2008 guilty plea in
Florida to soliciting prostitution from underage girls, according to news
reports.[118][119][120] Epstein and his businesses had dozens of accounts
through the private-banking division.[121][122] According to _The New York
Times,_ Deutsche Bank managers overruled compliance officers who raised
concerns about Epstein's reputation _._[119]

The bank found suspicious transactions in which Epstein moved money out of the
United States, the _Times_ reported.[121]

On 1 June 2018, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
announced that criminal cartel charges were expected to be laid by the
Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) against ANZ Bank, its
Group Treasurer Rick Moscati, along with Deutsche Bank, Citigroup and a number
of individuals.[123][124]

On 19 November 2018, a whistleblower on alleged money-laundering activities
undertaken by Danske Bank stated that a large European bank was involved in
helping Danske process $150 billion in suspect funds.[125] Although the
whistleblower, Howard Wilkinson, did not name Deutsche Bank directly, another
inside source claimed the institute in question was Deutsche Bank's U.S.
unit.[126]

On 20 July 2018, Deutsche Bank agreed to pay nearly $75 million to settle
charges of improper handling of "pre-released" American depositary receipts
(ADRs) under investigation of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC). Deutsche Bank didn't admit or deny the investigation findings but
agreed to pay disgorgement of more than $44.4 million in ill-gotten gains plus
$6.6 million in prejudgment interest and a penalty of $22.2 million.[127][128]

U.S. prosecutors are investigating Deutsche Bank's role in a multibillion-
dollar fraud scandal involving the 1Malaysia Development Berhad, or 1MDB,
according to news reports in July 2019.[129][130] Deutsche Bank helped raise
$1.2 billion for the 1MDB in 2014.[130]

