**Digital terrestrial television** ( **DTTV** or **DTT** ) is a technology for
terrestrial television in which land-based (terrestrial) television stations
broadcast television content by radio waves to televisions in consumers'
residences in a digital format. DTTV is a major technological advance over the
previous analog television, and has largely replaced analog which had been in
common use since the middle of the 20th century. Test broadcasts began in 1998
with the changeover to DTTV (aka Analog Switchoff (ASO) or Digital Switchover
(DSO)) beginning in 2006 and is now complete in many countries. The advantages
of _digital_ terrestrial television are similar to those obtained by
digitising platforms such as cable TV, satellite, and telecommunications: more
efficient use of limited radio spectrum bandwidth, provision of more
television channels than analog, better quality images, and potentially lower
operating costs for broadcasters (after the initial upgrade costs).

Different countries have adopted different digital broadcasting standards; the
major ones are:[1]

DTT is transmitted using radio frequencies through terrestrial space in the
same way as the former analog television systems, with the primary difference
being the use of multiplex transmitters to allow reception of multiple
services (TV, radio stations or data) on a single frequency (such as a UHF or
VHF channel).

The amount of data that can be transmitted (and therefore the number of
channels) is directly affected by channel capacity and the modulation method
of the transmission.[2]

North America uses the ATSC standard with 8VSB modulation, which has similar
characteristics to the vestigial sideband modulation used for analog
television. This provides considerably more immunity to interference, but is
not immune to multipath distortion and also does not provide for single-
frequency network operation (which is in any case not a requirement in the
United States).[ _citation needed_ ]

The modulation method in DVB-T is COFDM with either 64 or 16-state Quadrature
Amplitude Modulation (QAM). In general, 64QAM is capable of transmitting a
greater bit rate, but is more susceptible to interference. 16 and 64QAM
constellations can be combined in a single multiplex, providing a controllable
degradation for more important program streams. This is called hierarchical
modulation. DVB-T (and even more so DVB-T2) are tolerant of multipath
distortion and are designed to work in single frequency networks.

Developments in video compression have resulted in improvements on the
original H.262 MPEG 2 codec, which has been surpassed by H.264/MPEG-4 AVC and
more recently H.265 HEVC. H.264 enables three high-definition television
services to be coded into a 24 Mbit/s DVB-T European terrestrial transmission
channel.[2] DVB-T2 increases this channel capacity to typically 40 Mbit/s,
allowing even more services.

DTTV is received either via a digital set-top box (STB), TV gateway or more
usually now an integrated tuner included with television sets, that decodes
the signal received via a standard television antenna. These devices often now
include digital video recorder (DVR) functionality.[3] However, due to
frequency planning issues, an aerial capable of receiving a different channel
group (usually a wideband) may be required if the DTTV multiplexes lie outside
the reception capabilities of the originally installed aerial.[4] This is
quite common in the UK; see external links.

Indoor aerials are even more likely to be affected by these issues and
possibly need replacing.[5]

Afghanistan officially launched digital transmissions in Kabul using
DVB-T2/MPEG-4 on Sunday, 31 August 2014.[6] Test transmissions had commenced
on 4 UHF channels at the start of June 2014. Transmitters were provided by
GatesAir.

Bangladesh had its first DTT service DVB-T2/MPEG-4 on April 28, 2016 launched
by the GS Group. The service is called RealVU.

It is done with partnership with Beximco. GS Group acts as a supplier and
integrator of its in-house hardware and software solutions for the operator's
functioning in accordance with the modern standards of digital
television.RealVu provides more than 100 TV channels in SD and HD quality.

The digital TV set-top boxes developed by GS Group offer such functions as PVR
and time-shift, along with an EPG.

India adopted DVB-T system for digital television in July 1999.[7] The first
DVB-T transmission was started on 26 January 2003 in the four major
metropolitan cities by Doordarshan.[8] Currently the terrestrial transmission
is available in both digital and analog formats. 4 high power DVB-T
transmitters were set up in the top 4 cities, which were later upgraded to
DVB-T2 + MPEG4 and DVB-H standards. An additional 190 high power, and 400 low
power DVB-T2 transmitters have been approved for Tier I, II and III cities of
the country by 2017. The Indian telecom regulator, TRAI, had recommended the
I&B to allow private broadcast companies to use the DTT technology, in
2005.[9] So far, the Indian I&B ministry only permits private broadcast
companies to use satellite, cable and IPTV based systems. The government's
broadcasting organisation Doordarshan had started the free TV service over DVB
- T2 to the mobile phone users from February 25 onwards and extended to cover
16 cities including the four metros from April 5, 2016.[10]

Israel started digital transmissions in MPEG-4 on Sunday, August 2, 2009, and
analogue transmissions ended on March 31, 2011. Israel was the first nation in
the Middle East and the first non-European nation to shut down its analogue TV
distribution system. The new service which is operated by The Second Authority
for Television and Radio in Israel currently offers 6 SD TV channels and 30
national and regional (private) radio services. According to government
decisions, the system will expand to include two additional multiplexes that
will carry new channels and HD versions of the existing channels. There is a
proposition by the Ministry of Finance to run a tender in order to hand over
the maintenance of the system to a private company that, in return, will
receive an extended license and will be able to offer pay TV channels. In this
matter nothing has been decided upon until the end on 2012.

On March 20, 2013, it was announced that Thomson Broadcast had won a major
contract with The Second Authority for Television and Radio for the extension
of its nationwide DVB-T/DVB-T2 network. The Second Authority's order for new
infrastructure includes two new multiplexes on thirty sites including three
single frequency areas. This major deal incorporates a three-year service
agreement for the global transmission system.

Sixty-three high- and medium- power transmitters from Thomson's GreenPower
range have been ordered together with installation and commissioning services,
in a deal which follows on from the company's earlier deployment of DVB-T
multiplexes over thirty transmission and sixty-two repeater sites. Equipped
with dualcast-ready digital exciters, the GreenPower range offers the ability
to smoothly migrate from DVB-T to DVB-T2 and to easily offer additional HDTV
content. Ranging from low- to high- power, the range covers all the power
requirements of The Second Authority. Thomson will also deploy its user-
friendly centralized Network Management System to control and monitor the
overall transmission system from a single facility.

The deal includes a new service level agreement providing The Second Authority
with a high level of local services to keep its currently operating DTV
transmission equipment running 24/7, 365 days a year.

The Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications and DPA (The
Association for Promotion of Digital Broadcasting-Japan) jointly set the
specification and announced a guideline for "simplified DTT tuners" with price
under 5,000 Japanese yen on December 25, 2007. MIAC officially solicited
manufactures to put it on the market by end of March 2010 (end of fiscal year
2009). MIAC is estimating that 14 million, at maximum, traditional non-digital
TV sets remain and need the "simplified DTT tuner" to be adapted even after
complete transition to DTT after July 2011; it is aiming to avoid the disposal
of large numbers of useless TV sets without such a tuner at one time.

On December 20, 2007, the Japan Electronics and Information Technology
Industries Association published rules for Digital Rights Management for DTT
broadcasting under the name "Dubbing 10". Despite the name, consumers were
allowed to use Blu-ray Disc and other recorders to "dub" or copy the video and
audio of entire TV programs up to 9 times, with 1 final "move" permitted.

Broadcasting with "Dubbing 10" was supposed to start at about 4:00 a.m. on
June 2, 2008, but was postponed after lengthy talks with the Japanese Society
for Rights of Authors, Composers and Publishers. It finally started about 4:00
a.m. on July 4, 2008. The manufacturers of DVD and DTT recorders were to make
units conforming to the "Dubbing 10" rules, and some manufacturers announced
plans for create firmware downloads to allow users to update their existing
recorders.

On April 3, 2008, DPA announced that a total of 32.71 million of DTT (ISDB-T)
TV sets capable of DTT reception (excepting 1seg receivers) had been installed
in Japan as of the end of March 2008. On April 8, 2008 DPA also announced
guidelines for manufacturers of DTT receiving, record and replay unit which
operate with personal computers. These add-on units operate on USB or PCI BUS,
and went on sale on a reservation basis from late April, appearing in retail
store in mid-May 2008.

On May 8, 2008, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications announced
that 43.7% of homes had DTT (ISDB-T) capable TVs and/or tuners with DVD
recorder by end of March 2008.It had been 27.8% one year before, and the
ministry was expecting 100% penetration by April 2011. On 27 April 2009,
National Association of Commercial Broadcasters in Japan (NAB) a new official
mascot, Chidejika, to replace Tsuyoshi Kusanagi after he was arrested on
suspicion of public indecency.

On September 3, 2009, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications
announced the procurement by tender of 5,000-8,000 sets of "simplified DTT
tuners" with remote control for the citywide test transition from analogue to
digital in Suzu, Ishikawa. The sets should be delivered by end November
2009.[12] The program is aiming to examine the transition problem at
individuals' home in country wide such as senior and non-technical families.
Based on this rehearsal plan, analog TV transmission was interrupted in Suzu
and parts of Noto for 48 hours, between noon on 2010/01/22 and noon on
2010/01/24.[13][14]

On September 4, 2009, ÆON announced the low cost "simplified DTT tuners" with
remote control for ISDB-T to sell at JUSCO from September 19, 2009. The tuner
is produced by Pixela Corporation, and met the retail price of under 5,000
Japanese yen, which is the target price to industry by Dpa (The Association
for Promotion of Digital Broadcasting (デジタル放送推進協会, _dejitaru housou suishin
kyōkai_ )). The tuner connects to an old fashioned TV though an RCA connector
with SDTV quality and some other minimal functions.[15]

On September 7, 2009, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications
appointed two manufacturers I-O Data and Melco among 12 bids for minimal
functioning "simplified DTT tuners" with remote control for ISDB-T of free
supply to Japanese Temporary Assistance for Needy Families. Tuner connects to
old fashion TV though RCA connector with SDTV quality and some other minimal
function.[16] On July 24, 2010, at noon, analog TV transmission officially
stopped in Suzu and parts of Noto (approximately 8,800 homes) as the rehearsal
plan that took place one year ahead of the nationwide shutdown, which is
scheduled on July 24, 2011. Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications
shall watch what type of problem arise in transition to DTT which might apply
to the nationwide shutdown.

On April 20, 2011, Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications confirmed,
and made the resolution by the House of Councillors on June 8, 2011, that the
analog terrestrial TV close down schedule on 24 July 2011 will be unchanged,
with the exception being the close down having to be postponed by a maximum
one year. Analog television shut down on March 31, 2012, in Iwate, Miyagi and
Fukushima prefectures, which were heavily damaged in the 2011 Tōhoku
earthquake and tsunami and the nuclear accidents that followed it.[17][18]
Analog television stations are required to cease normal programming at noon
and shut down their signals at midnight.

Digital television in Malaysia was first rolled out in January 2014.[19][20]
By June 2015, free digital television was provided by MYTV Broadcasting. In
the first phase, there would be around 15 digital television stations
nationwide with further stations will be added in the next phase.[21] By
November 2016, MYTV set top box also available for sale in electronics store
nationwide. Malaysia's Prime Minister at the time Najib Razak officiated the
launching of digital television in the country on 6 June 2017 with an estimate
of 4.2 million digital television decoders freely distributed to the country
citizens, including recipients of the government aid of 1Malaysia People's Aid
(BR1M).[22][23]

The government has planned for a full shutdown of analogue television
broadcasting by September 2019 with a full introduction of digital television
will be available to public by October.[24][25][26] Langkawi become the first
area of analogue television switch off that were executed on 21 July at 02:30
AM (UTC+8).[27] Further on 6 August, the Malaysian Communications and
Multimedia Ministry released a complete list of transition date on the
remaining areas with central and southern West Malaysia to be commenced on 19
August, northern West Malaysia on 2 September, eastern coast West Malaysia on
17 September and entire East Malaysia on 30 September.[28]

On June 11, 2010, National Telecommunications Commission of the Philippines
announced that the country will use the Japanese ISDB-T International
standard.[29][30] The first fully operational digital TV channel is Channel 49
of the religious group Iglesia ni Cristo.

However, in October 2012, DZCE-TV (which occupies the channel) reopened the
analog signal to relaunch as INC TV; therefore, channel 49 can only transmit
digitally during off-air hours of the analog channel 49.

This was followed by state-owned television network PTV which conducted its
test transmission on UHF Channel 48.

On February 11, 2015, the major TV network ABS-CBN commercially launched the
digital TV box called ABS-CBN TV Plus also known as _Mahiwagang Blackbox_.
Seven years before the commercial launch, the network initially applied for a
license from NTC on digital free TV. The digital TV box was given away as a
prize for the loyal viewers and listeners of ABS-CBN channel 2, DZMM (AM radio
station of ABS-CBN) and DZMM TeleRadyo (TV-radio cable channel of ABS-CBN)
after the initial application.

Digital television transition began on February 28, 2017, with ZOE
Broadcasting Network's DZOZ-TV as the country's first station to permanently
shut down analog terrestrial transmissions[31] without any test simulcast with
its digital signal, and is expected to be finished by 2023.[32]

On 25 May 2018, Solar Entertainment Corp began a new digital TV service called
Easy TV where most of its channels are offered to consumers through Easy TV's
proprietary set-top box.

In 2005, the Ministry of Information announced their plan to digitalise
nationwide free-to-air TV broadcasts led by MCOT Public Company Limited
(MCOT). Trial broadcasts were undertaken, involving one thousand households in
the Bangkok Metropolitan Area from December 2000 till May 2001. According to
the then-Deputy Minister of Information, the trial received "very positive"
feedback, i.e. "more than 60 percent said the quality of the signal ranged
from good to very good. Over 88 percent said the picture quality improved,
while 70 percent said the sound quality was better."

According to Information Minister, Sontaya Kunplome, MCOT is expected to fully
complete its digitalization in 2012 as part of its three-year restructuring
process. Each household, once equipped with the necessary equipment (set-top
box or iDTV set) is expected to receive up to 19 channels, seven of which fall
under MCOT and the rest for private broadcasters such as BEC-TERO which owns
its channels such as TV3. Thus far, besides simulcasting Modernine TV and
Television of Thailand, MCOT is test-airing MCOT 1, MCOT 2 and MCOT 3
exclusively on the digital TV platform, transmitted at UHF channel 44,
modulated at 64QAM. MCOT was also expected to launch regional channels for
each province and/or territory in Thailand, making it 80 MCOT television
channels. BEC-TERO was expected to commence trials in March 2009.

Thailand and the rest of ASEAN countries (with the exception of the
Philippines; see above) have selected DVB-T as the final DTV standard, and are
expected to switch off analogue broadcasts completely by 2015.[33] In June
2008, participants of the 6th ASEAN Digital Broadcast Meeting from seven
south-east Asian countries (including Thailand) agreed to finalise the
specifications of the DTV set-top box for use within ASEAN, and also set up an
ASEAN HD Centre to provide training on HDTV content to broadcasters in the
region.[34]

Even though MCOT's trial was a success, the future of the digital terrestrial
television transition has become uncertain, especially after the end of
Somchai Wongsawat's tenure as the Prime Minister and the beginning of
successor Abhisit Vejjajiva's reign in favor of his concept.

In March 2011, MCOT announced that it is also possible that MCOT may be
planning to switch to DVB-T2 some time in the future to replace DVB-T.

The Switch-off Date has been planned for 2020. (Only for Channel 3 (Thailand))
For now, five analogue channels has been off-air since 16 June 2018(Thai
Public Broadcasting Service and Channel 7 (Thailand)), 21 June (Channel 5
(Thailand)) and 16 July (Channel 9 MCOT HD and NBT)

Australia uses DVB-T. The transition to digital television and the phaseout of
analogue television was completed on 10 December 2013.

New Zealand uses DVB-T. The transition to digital television and the shutdown
of analogue transmissions was completed on 1 December 2013

The EU recommended in May 2005[35] that its Member States cease all analogue
television transmissions by January 1, 2012. Some EU member states decided to
complete the transition as early as 2006 for Luxembourg and the Netherlands,
and 2007 for Finland.[36] Latvia stopped broadcasting analogue television from
June 1, 2010. Poland completed the transition on 23 July 2013 and Bulgaria
completed the transition on 30 September 2013. Malta switched on 1 November
2011. ASO was mostly completed in Europe in 2013 though small hilly
underpopulated isolated terrain areas awaited DTT rollout beyond that
date.[37][38]

Many TV-viewers TV-equipment in Europe might experience TV-interference and
blocking because of 800 MHz broadband usage.

Bulgaria launched a free-to-air platform on Sofia region, starting in November
2004. Standards chosen are DVB-T and MPEG4 AVC/H.264 compression format.
DVB-T2 will not be used at this time. The Communications Regulatory Commission
(CRC) has said that it received 6 bids for the licence to build and operate
Bulgaria's two nationwide DTT networks. A second licence tender for the
operation of 3 DTT multiplexes was open until 27 May 2009.[39][40] Following
the closing of this process, Hannu Pro, part of Silicon Group, and with Baltic
Operations has secured the license to operate three DTT multiplexes in
Bulgaria by the country's Communications Regulatory Commission (CRC) Bulgaria
officially completed the transition to digital broadcasting on Monday, 30
September 2013.[41]

Flanders has no free-to-air television, as Dutch-language public broadcaster
VRT shut off its DVB-T service on December 1, 2018 citing minimal usage.[42]
After some outcry over the loss of terrestrial coverage, VRT's channels were
added to TV Vlaanderen's subscription DVB-T2 package alongside all major
Dutch-language commercial channels.[43]

French-language public broadcaster RTBF remains available in Brussels and
Wallonia via DVB-T transmissions.

DTT had its technical launch in Denmark in March 2006 after some years of
public trials. The official launch was at midnight on November 1, 2009 where
the analogue broadcasts shut down nationwide.

As of January 2013, five national multiplexes are available, broadcasting
several channels in both SD and HD via both DVB-T and DVB-T2, all using the
MPEG-4 codec.

MUX 1 and 2 are Free-to-air and operated by I/S DIGI-TV, a joint-venture
between DR and TV 2.

MUX 3, 4 and 5 are operated by Boxer, and are for pay television only.

Finland launched DTT in 2001, and terminated analogue transmissions nationwide
on 1 September 2007. Finland has successfully launched a mixture of pay and
free-to-air DTT services. Digita operates the DTT and Mobile Terrestrial
networks and rents capacity to broadcasters on its network on a neutral market
basis. Digita is owned by TDF (France).[44][45] The pay-DTT service provider
Boxer has acquired a majority stake in the leading Finnish pay DTT operator
PlusTV which offers a number of commercial channels for a subscription. It
started in October 2006. Boxer already provides pay-DTT services in Sweden and
Denmark.[46]

Three nationwide multiplexes are granted to DNA and Anvia for DVB-T2 for High
Definition and Standard Definition channel (MPEG4).

France's _télévision numérique terrestre_ (TNT) offers 25 free national
channels and 9 pay channels, plus up to 4 local free channels. An 89% DTT
penetration rate is expected by December 2008. Free-to-view satellite services
offering the same DTT offer were made available in June 2007. Since 12
December 2012, TNT has delivered ten free HD channels (TF1 HD, France2 HD, M6
HD, Arte HD, HD1, L'Équipe 21, 6ter, Numéro 23, RMC Découverte HD, Chérie 25)
and one pay TNT HD channel (Canal+ HD) using the MPEG4 AVC/H.264 compression
format. French consumer technology magazine _Les Numériques_ gave the picture
quality of TNT's previous 1440x1080i service a score of 8/10, compared to
10/10 for Blu-ray 1080p.[47]

Typically:

For the audio part AC3 and AAC are used in 192 kbits for 2.0 and 384 kbits for
5.1. Typically up to four audio part can be used:  
French 5.1  
VO (original language) 5.1  
French 2.0  
Audivision 5.1

Prime Minister François Fillon confirmed that the final analogue switch-off
date would be 30 November 2011.[48] DTT coverage had to reach 91% of a given
__département__ before analogue transmissions could be switched off. CSA
announced a call to tender for more local DTT licences on 15 June 2009 and 66
new DTT sites went up since May 2009 to expand coverage to cover low
population areas.[49][50]

Freesat began broadcasts from the Eutelsat Atlantic Bird 3 satellite from June
2009 as Fransat, providing for those unable to receive DTT signals for terrain
reasons in preparation for ASO in 2011. Eighteen channels were broadcast
initially and although free to watch, viewers needed to buy a set top box with
smart card for €99 according to DVB.org article.[51]

The end dates of analogue shutdown were: 2 February 2010: Alsace, 9 March
2010: Lower Normandy, 18 May 2010: Pays de la Loire, 8 June 2010: Bretagne, 28
September 2010: Lorraine and Champagne-Ardenne, 19 October 2010: Poitou-
Charentes and the middle of the country, November 2010: Franche-Comté and
Bourgogne, 7 December 2010: North of the country, First quarter 2011: Picardie
and Haute-Normandie, Île-de-France, Aquitaine and Limousin, Auvergne, Côte
d'Azur and Corsica, Rhône, Second quarter 2011 (before November 30): Provence,
Alpes, Midi-Pyrénées, Languedoc-Roussillon.[52][53]

Germany launched a free-to-air platform region-by-region, starting in Berlin
in November 2002. The analogue broadcasts were planned to cease soon after
digital transmissions are started. Berlin became completely digital on 4
August 2003 with other regions completing between then and 2008. Digital
switchover has been completed throughout Germany as of 2 December 2008 and
services are now available to 100% of the population following the update of
infill for the remaining 10% of transmitters by Media Broadcast who set up
broadcast antennas at 79 transmission sites and installed 283 new transmitter
stations. More services are to be launched on DTT and some pay DTT channels
are or have been launched in various areas such as Stuttgart and soon
Leipzig.[54]

The following switch-offs are in cooperation with Digea, so the dates are the
same.

Digea:

Digital Union:

ERT \- NOVA (pay TV platform):

TV1 Syros started its first pilot broadcasts on November 1, 2008 in Cyclades
(Syros): 60 UHF.

As of February 6, 2015, Greece has completed its transition to digital TV..

Experimental DTT broadcast has started in December 2008. The program of Duna
Televízió was broadcast during the trials. Originally analog television was
planned to be shut down on 1 January 2012, but this deadline was first pushed
out to 2014 then brought forward to 2013. Analogue broadcast was terminated at
12:30pm, on 31 July 2013 in the central part of Hungary, and October 2013 in
the rest of the country. M1, M2, Duna TV, Duna World, RTL Klub, TV2 and
Euronews are available as free-view. M1, M2 and Duna TV are also available in
HD.

On both of the 2013 shutoff dates, all analog channels ceased normal
programming at 12:30pm and showed a silent ASO information screen that has a
phone number to call for help. It was kept on for a few days, after which the
analog transmitters are permanently shut down.

In Ireland DTT has been somewhat problematic. Responsibility for DTT, based on
plans of Raidió Teilifís Éireann, was divided between two government
Departments with differing views on its running. This delayed the project,
took away its momentum and the economic situation deteriorated so that the
opportunity to launch in good conditions was lost. When legislation finally
arrived after two years to enable DTT to proceed, a private sector model was
envisaged similar to the UK. A company trading as "It's TV" was the sole
applicant for a digital terrestrial television license under the provisions of
the Irish Broadcasting Act 2001. The "It's TV" proposed a triple play
deployment with Broadband, TV and Digital Radio services, but the on air
return channel (DVB-RCT system) for "interactive" use while 10s of Mbps per
mast, would per user only have been 300 to 2400bit/s at peak times, they never
got approval to run an Internet service. RTÉ was to have a minority stake in
its network and sell its majority share. However legislative delays and
economic changes made it financially difficult for RTÉ to get a good price for
the network stake. "It's TV" plans raise the necessary funding failed due to
the lack of approval for Internet aspect and infeasible Internet access model.
Other DTT deployments in operation around that time also went bust, most
particularly in the UK, Spain and Portugal. "It's TV" failed to get its
license conditions varied or to get a time extension for securing funding. Its
license was either never awarded (as they could not demonstrate a viable
business plan & funding) or was eventually withdrawn for non-performance.

Under subsequent legislation in May 2007, RTÉ, the spectrum regulator (ComReg)
and the broadcasting regulator BCI (now BAI), were mandated to invite
applications during 2008 under the Broadcasting (Amendment) Act 2007. RTÉ and
the BCI received licenses from ComReg for spectrum to establish DTT. The BAI
advertised and invited multiplex submissions by 2 May 2008. RTÉ Networks was
required to broadcast in digital terrestrial TV (aerial TV) and received an
automatic license through the RTÉ Authority. It has been expanding and
upgrading its transmission network to digital terrestrial during 2009 which
will culminate in 98% coverage by 31 December 2011 with analog switchover to
begin in Summer 2012 in concert with Northern Ireland, under the MOU signed
with the UK and Irish Governments.[56]

It is also making this network available to the commercial multiplex winner
for rental of capacity once negotiations are concluded, rental agreed and a
security bond received.[57] It has been testing the BAI multiplexes since
November 2009 across the network, which is publicly receivable with the
correct DTT receivers. 1 Mux (a group of broadcast channels) will provide the
services of the public service broadcaster and have 98% population coverage by
31 December 2011. The other three multiplexes will have between 90% and 92%
population coverage. Following Analogue Switchover one additional PSB mux and
one or more commercial muxes will be made available for DTT, mobile
television, broadband and other services.

The BCI (now BAI) received three conditional applications to operate the three
muxes which were presented to the public on 12 May 2008. It decided in
principle to allocate the license to Boxer DTT Ltd, a consortium made up of
the Swedish pay-DTT operator Boxer and the media group Communicorp at its
board meeting on 21 July 2008.[58]

On 20 April 2009, the BCI revealed that Boxer had withdrawn their license, and
it was instead given to the runner-up applicant OneVision.[59] At the end of
April 2010 the negotiations with Onevision ended and they also decided to
return the license. On April 29, 2010 the contract was offered to the only
remaining applicant, Easy TV.[60][61] The Easy TV consortium informed the BAI
on 12 May 2010 that it was declining their offer to pursue negotiations
regarding the Commercial DTT Multiplex Licence.[62]

A Houses of the Oireachtas Channel (reportedly shelved in December 2008) and
the Irish Film Channel (whose status is unclear though a company has been
formed to provide the channel)[63] were enabled for establishment as public
service broadcasters on Irish DTT.[64][65]

The Broadcasting Authority of Ireland replaced the Broadcasting Complaints
Commission, the Broadcasting Commission of Ireland and the RTÉ Authority. The
BAI includes Awards and Advisory Committees under statutory instrument 389
that gave effect to the provisions of the Broadcasting Act 2009. This
legislation dissolved the BCI, vesting it and new responsibilities, assets and
liabilities in a new Broadcasting Authority of Ireland on October 1, 2009.[66]
This act also deals with analogue switchover.

A DTT Information Campaign was announced by the Department of Communications,
Energy and Natural Resources, to launch in March 2009 ahead of the September
2009 launch of Irish DTT.[67] as of December 2009, the information campaign
has not launched and has been postponed until after Saorview launches its
public testing phase.[68] The Information Campaign is to be undertaken by the
BAI, with support of the Department.

As of October 30, 2010 FTA DTT, which will be known as Saorview, has
launched[69] following a direction from the Minister for Communications,
Energy & Natural Resources, to RTÉ and the signing of the _RTÉ (National
Television Multiplex) Order 2010 (S.I. No. 85 of 2010)_ on February 26,
2010.[70] The rollout of FTA Saorview DTT will now proceed, and a commercial
DTT competition may well be deferred until the economic situation
improves.[71]

On 1 July 2010 RTÉ announced that Mary Curtis, RTÉ's current deputy head of TV
programming, would take on the role of Director of Digital Switchover
(DSO).[72]

In May 2011, RTÉ launched Saorview, which was officially opened by Minister
Rabbitte.[73]

On October 14, 2011, Minister Rabbitte announced that analogue terrestrial
television broadcast would be switched off on October 24, 2012. This date was
chosen in consultation with the UK on its Northern Ireland analogue switchover
date so that both jurisdictions on the island would switch over at roughly the
same time. This was done to make it straightforward for citizens on both sides
of the border.,[74] referring citizens to both Saorview's website[75] and the
Department's Digital Switchover Website[76]  
On 24 October 2012 all analogue television transmission in Ireland ended,
leaving Saorview as the primary source of broadcast television in Ireland.

The switch-off of the analogue terrestrial network progressed
region–by–region. It started on Wednesday 15 October 2008, and was completed
on Wednesday 4 July 2012. The selected broadcasting standard is DVB-T with
MPEG2 video for SD and H.264 video for HD, audio is usually MPEG1. The whole
frequency spectrum has been allocated with SFN in mind. Along the original
analog free to air channels that switched to digital, a few new pay per view
platforms came around with the advent of DTT. Worth mentioning is the addition
of an experimental free to air HD 1080i channel from RAI which is set to
broadcast important sport events like the Olympic Games or the FIFA World Cup.

Luxembourg launched DTT services in April 2006. The national service launched
in June 2006. On 1 September 2006, Luxembourg became the first European
country to transition completely to DTT. Luxe TV, a niche theme based station,
soon began broadcasting on the Luxembourg DTT platform, transmitted from the
Dudelange transmitter. The aim was to reach audiences in some parts of Germany
as well as in Luxembourg.[77][78]

The Netherlands launched its DTT service 23 April 2003, and terminated
analogue transmissions nationwide on 11 December 2006. KPN owns Digitenne
which provides a mix of FTA public channels and paid DTT services.[79] It also
provides a mobile broadcast DVB-H service as well as an IPTV service, with DTT
the most popular of its products.[80]

DTT launch in Poland was scheduled for Autumn 2009. Regulatory disagreements
delayed its tender and approach until resolved and the multiplexes available
for DTT were reduced to 3 and the 2nd was licensed in the Autumn of 2009. The
reduction from 5 to 3 enabled mobile TV and broadband to get more spectrum
allocation. Muxes 2 and 3 therefore had limited coverage until ASO. Polsat,
TVN, TV4 and TV Puls have officially applied to reserve space on the countries
first multiplex set to start in September. Wirtualne Media is given as the
source of the story. The public broadcaster's three main channels TVP1, TVP2
and TVP Info had already been allocated capacity on the multiplex.

Poland ended its television broadcast in analogue on 23 July 2013. A mobile TV
license has also been awarded in Poland to Info TV FM to use DVB-H
standard.[81]

Portugal launched its DTT service on 29 April 2009, available to around 20% of
the Portuguese population and Portugal Telecom expected to reach 80% of the
population by the end of the 2009. Airplus TV Portugal that was set up to
compete for a licence to manage Portugal's pay-TV DTT multiplexes, dissolved
as it did not get the license and a Portuguese court ruled not to suspend the
process for the awarding of a licence to Portugal Telecom, based on a
complaint submitted by Airplus TV Portugal. After Airplus TV Portugal was
dissolved, Portugal Telecom informed that will not honour the pay-TV DTT
multiplexes licence obligations. ANACOM, the Portuguese communications
authority, accepted. Portugal thus has only one active multiplexer.[82]

In Romania, broadcasting regulations have been amended so that DTT service
providers have only a single licence rather than the two previously required
by the National Audiovisual Council (CNA). DTT services were launched in
December 2009 using the MPEG-4 (H.264 AVC) compression format[83] following
the Ministry of Communications publication of a strategic plan for the
transition to digital broadcasting. According to Media Express, it envisaged a
maximum of five national UHF multiplexes, a national VHF multiplex and a
multiplex allocated to regional and local services, all in accordance with the
ITU Geneva Conference RRC-06 reports BroadbandTVNews.

The Ministry of Communications (MCSI) estimated that 49% of Romania's 7.5
million households got TV from cable and 27% from DTH services in Romania
while terrestrial TV was used by 18% of the TV households. 6% are reported as
not able to receive TV transmissions. Subsidies were offered for those below a
certain income to assist switchover for them.[84] Switchover was scheduled for
January 2012.[85]

Romkatel, the local representative of Kathrein, have since been awarded the
commercial Romanian DTT services license. ZF reported that Romkatel has signed
a 12-month contract worth €710,420, having beaten off a challenge from
France's TDF. The tender was organised by Romania's National Society for
Radiocommunications (SNR).[86] Meanwhile, the National Audiovisual Council, in
charge of the public service broadcasting sector has awarded digital licences
to the public channels TVR1 and TVR2.

According to Media Express, this followed a short debate at the National
Audiovisual Council (CNA) about whether to also award licences to the nine
remaining public channels, one of which transmits in HD and five are regional.

Romania's first DTT multiplex is likely to have the five leading commercial
channels — Pro TV, Antena 1 (Romania), Prima TV, Kanal D Romania and
Realitatea TV — as well as TVR1 and TVR2.

The National Authority in Communications (ANCOM), will most probably award the
transmission network contract for this to the national transmission company
Radiocommunicatii.[87]

In June 2013, the Romanian Government issued a Strategy to shift from analogue
terrestrial to digital terrestrial that pushes ahead the until the date
stopped process. According to the Strategy one of the five planned digital
terrestrial multiplexes will be de facto granted to Radiocom, the state
company involved in terrestrial carrying the public television signals, way
before a selection for the muxes operators will be organized by ANCOM,
selection with the deadline of June 17, 2015. Government is describing the
Radiocom multiplex with the terms "pilot project" and "experiment". The
minimum technical requirements for this project are: broadcast standard
DVB-T2, ensuring the coverage of up to 40% of the population until July 1,
2014, and 70% of the population up to June 17, 2015, and the possibility of
using the broadcasting premises that belongs to Radiocom.[88]

On 17 June 2015, Romania turned off analog broadcasting, and started
broadcasting with DVB-T2 technology, but with very low coverage, and a very
reduced number of broadcasts available. Because of low coverage, Romania will
still broadcast TVR1 in analog format on VHF until 31 December 2015. DVB-T
continues to be available for an undetermined period of time, only in Sibiu (
Ch 47 and Ch 54) and Bucharest ( Ch 54 and Ch 59). However, since the analogue
turn-off, many people who were receiving TV on terrestrial shifted to a cable
or DTH operator . To the present day, DVB-T and DVB-T2 are still in
experimental broadcast. The delay of DVB-T launching is criticized by some
people in Romania, as a form of sustaining the interest of cable and DTH
providers, by delaying the stable launch of DVB-T and decreasing the number of
channels ( once, there were available 18 channels in DVB-T, even 3 in HD) but
to the present day the number has fallen to only 6, and continues to be lower,
especially since TVR announced that they will reduce the number of channels
(TVR news will be shut down, probably because of low audience, the same for
TVR 3, and the fate of TVR HD, which is one of the channels with the largest
audience in TVR Group after TVR1, is unknown). Kanal D left terrestrial
platform on 2 July 2015, and, Antena 3 is the only channel except TVR's
available on terrestrial in DVB-T. It is unknown whether Antena 3 will remain
available on DVB-T, will shift to DVB-T2, or fully leave the terrestrial
platform . Antena Group channels were once available both analogue and digital
in terrestrial. Also, many people in Romania are somehow surprised by the fact
that Romania had regressed in terrestrial broadcasts, because in analogue
there were, once, about 8 channels ( in Bucharest), and decreasing to only 6
channels in Digital terrestrial is a regress. However, terrestrial TV was
heavily surpassed both by DTH, or Cable, some people are even watching foreign
FTA on satellite, because foreign broadcasts are having a more interesting
content than Romanian channels. To the present day, DVB-T and T2 are still in
tests. Although many TV sellers are marking DVB-T2 capable sets as being
compatible with digital terrestrial television in Romania, by highlighting
this feature with a sticker on the TV, buyers are mainly interested if the TV
has digital cable tunner or digital satellite tuner, however TV sets without
DVB-T2 continue to be sold with only DVB-T/C and sometimes S2, as cable and
satellite compatibility presents most of interest.

In Spain most multiplexes closed after the failure of Quiero TV, the country's
original pay DTT platform. DTT was relaunched on 30 November 2005, with 20
free-to-air national TV services as well as numerous regional and local
services. Nearly 11 million DTT receivers had been sold as of July 2008.
Positive approval for pay DTT services have reportedly been given by Spain's
Ministry of Industry in a surprise move on 17 June of the Advisory Council on
Telecommunications and the Information Society (Catsi). IT will now be
included in a Royal Decree. A number of leading Spanish media players
including Sogecable, Telefónica, Ono, Orange and Vodafone have apparently
criticised that as according to Prisa, Sogecable's owner, "it caps a series of
policy changes that benefits only a few audiovisual operators, those of
terrestrial TV, to the detriment of satellite operators, cable and DSL." There
may be appeals lodged against the government's decision.[89]

In Sweden, DTT was launched in 1999 solely as a paid service. As of 2007,
there are 38 channels in 5 MUXs. 11 of those are free-to-air channels from a
number of different broadcasters. Switch-off of the analogue TV service
started on 19 September 2005 and finished on 29 October 2007. Boxer began the
deployment of MPEG-4 receivers to new subscribers. Over the next six years
from 2008 Sweden will gradually migrate from MPEG-2 visual coding to using
MPEG-4, H.264. The Swedish Radio and TV Authority (RTVV) recently announced
eight new national channels that will broadcast in the MPEG-4 format. From 1
April 2008 Boxer is also responsible for approving devices to use on the
network, will no longer accept MPEG-2 receivers for test and approval. Set Top
Boxes must be backward compatible so that they can decode both MPEG-2 and
MPEG-4 coded transmissions.[90]

Switzerland will become the first country to eliminate broadcast television
entirely when public broadcaster SRG SSR, which runs the country's only
terrestrial channels, shuts down its DVB-T transmitter network in June 2019.
SRG SSR estimated that less than two per cent of households relied on its
DVB-T network, the large majority of which used it only for reception on
secondary devices; its programing will remain on IPTV services, cable, and
free-to-air satellite.[91]

The United Kingdom (1998), Sweden (1999) and Spain (2000) were the first to
launch DTT with platforms heavily reliant on pay television. All platforms
experienced many starter problems, in particular the British and Spanish
platforms which failed financially (mainly due to their encryption being
compromised). Nevertheless, Boxer, the Swedish pay platform which started in
October 1999, proved to be very successful.

DTT in the United Kingdom was launched in November 1998 as a primarily
subscription service branded as ONdigital, a joint venture between Granada
Television and Carlton Communications, with only a few channels being
available free to air. ONdigital soon ran into financial difficulties with
subscriber numbers below expectations, and in order to attempt to reverse
their fortunes, it was decided that the ITV and ONdigital brands should align,
and the service was rebranded ITV Digital in 2001. Despite an expensive
advertising campaign, ITV Digital struggled to attract sufficient new
subscribers and in 2002 closed the service. After commercial failure of the
Pay TV proposition it was relaunched as the free-to-air Freeview platform in
2002. Top Up TV, a _lite_ pay DTT service, became available in 2004 when
Inview launched the first DTT (Freeview) EPG service.[92]

On 30 March 2005, the older analogue signals began to be phased out on a
region-by-region basis (a process known as the Digital switchover, or DSO),
beginning with a technical trial at the Ferryside television relay station.
The first full transmitter to switch to digital-only transmission was the
Whitehaven transmitter in Cumbria, which completed its transition on Wednesday
17 October 2007. The switchover to digital-only broadcasting was completed on
24 October 2012 when the transmitters in Northern Ireland turned off their
analogue broadcasts (which coincided with the transition in the Republic of
Ireland).

The additional transmission frequencies freed up by the shutdown of analogue
signals have (among other things, such as the introduction of 4G mobile
internet) allowed for the creation of a single DVB-T2 multiplex used to carry
high-definition programming.[93][94] There are also plans to use one frequency
to launch local television services.

DTT was successfully launched in November 2009. It uses MPEG-2 for 4K UHD and
MPEG-4 for HD. The service was launched by ONE, and the platform is called
BoomTV. It offers 42 channels including all national networks and it is
available to 95% of the population.[95]

In Russia, digital television appeared in the summer of 2009, first the first
multiplex was created: (Channel One Russia, Russia-1, Russia-2 (now Match-TV),
NTV, Petersburg 5 channel, Russia-Culture, Russia-24, Bibigon (later -
Carousel) .In the spring of 2013, added two more channels of the First
multiplex: OTR and TV-Center

Digital format DVB-T on DVB-T2 was replaced on March 19, 2012

December 14, 2012 Digital TV appeared the Second Multiplex. Were part of: REN
TV, TV Center (from 2013 - Spas), STS, Domashniy, Sport (from 2013 - TV-3),
NTV Plus Sport Plus (then from 2015 - Pyatnica!), Zvezda, Mir, TNT and Muz -TV

In 2014, the third and fourth multiplex appeared in the Crimea. It was created
after the annexation of Crimea into Russia.

January 15, 2015 in Moscow and the Moscow region appeared The third multiplex
broadcast some satellite channels (for example, on 22 channel 2х2 at 12am and
in the 11:59am, My planet (Moya Planeta) in the 12pm-18pm, and in the
18pm-12am - Science 2.0 (Nauka 2.0) )

On November 30, 2018, the Ministry of digital development, communications and
mass communications of the Russian Federation offered them to turn off analog
broadcasting in three stages (February 11, April 15, June 3)

December 3, 2018-the first region to switch from analogue broadcasting to
digital broadcasting. June 3, 2019 — complete transition to digital TV
completed in Russia

On December 14, 2011, national public broadcaster ZNS-TV announced it would be
upgrading to ATSC digital television with mobile DTV capabilities, in line
with its neighbours, the United States and Puerto Rico.[96]

Bermuda has plans to convert its three broadcast stations to ATSC digital
terrestrial television in the future.

In Canada, analogue switch-off was mandated by regulatory authorities for all
provincial capital cities and all multi-station markets. Analogue would
continue in single-station markets and remote areas. With an exception,
analogue switch-off in the mandated areas took place on 31 August 2011. The
CBC was granted an exception in many smaller multi-station markets, due to the
cost of conversion, otherwise the CBC services would have gone dark in many
such markets. Most network stations are already broadcasting high-definition
digital signals in Toronto, Ottawa, Montreal, Calgary, Edmonton, Winnipeg,
Regina, and Vancouver. Most networks had been concerned about the August 2011
deadline as not all parts of the country were equipped to receive DTTV by the
scheduled date.

In Mexico, the digital transition is completed. Digital signals are available
in all cities, thus providing national coverage. Analog transmission were
turned off based on population size. Tijuana was the first city to turn off
analog signals and the nationwide turn off was completed on December 31,
2015.[97] On October 27, 2016, Mexico relocated all of its channels. This made
Azteca 13 (now Azteca Uno) on virtual channel 1.1 nationwide, Canal de Las
Estrellas (now Las Estrellas) on virtual channel 2.1 and Imagen Television on
virtual channel 3.1. Border cities were not affected due signal issues across
the United States. For example, in the Tijuana-San Diego area, channel 2.1's
signal comes from KCBS-TV, a CBS owned-and-operated station in Los Angeles,
and can affect television users in portions of San Diego County. Thus, Las
Estrellas is on virtual channel 57.1.

In the United States on 12 June 2009, all full-power U.S. television
broadcasts became exclusively digital, under the Digital Television and Public
Safety Act of 2005.[98][99] Furthermore, since 1 March 2007, new television
sets that receive signals over the air, including pocket-sized portable
televisions, include ATSC digital tuners for digital broadcasts.[100] Prior to
12 June 2009, most U.S. broadcasters were transmitting in both analog and
digital formats; a few were digital only. Most U.S. stations were not
permitted to shut down their analog transmissions prior to 16 February 2009
unless doing so was required in order to complete work on a station's
permanent digital facilities.[101] In 2009, the FCC finished auctioning
channels 52–59 (the lower half of the 700 MHz band) for other communications
services,[102] completing the reallocation of broadcast channels 52–69 that
began in the late 1990s.

The analog switch-off rendered all non-digital television sets unable to
receive most over-the-air television channels without an external setbox
receiver; however, low-power television stations and cable TV systems were not
required to convert to digital until 1 September 2015. Beginning 1 January
2008, consumers could request coupons to help cover most of the cost of these
converters by calling a toll-free number or via a website.[103] Some
television stations had also been licensed to operate "nightlights", analog
signals which consisted only of a brief repeated announcement advising
remaining analog viewers how to switch to digital reception.

Costa Rica chose Japanese-Brazilian standard ISDB-T as 7th country on May 25,
2010,[104] and started trial transmissions by Channel 13 from Irazú Volcano on
March 19, 2012[105]

Cuba announced on March 19, 2013 that it is "prepared" to perform a digital
television test using the Chinese DTMB system.[ _citation needed_ ]

The Dominican Republic chose ATSC standards for DTT on August 10, 2010.[106]

El Salvador has chosen the Japanese / Brazilian standard ISDB-Tb in 2017. The
Digital Switchover began on 21 December 2018, and by the year 2022 it will be
completed. [107]

Nicaragua has chosen the Japanese-Brazilian standard ISDB-Tb.

Panama chose the European DVB-T standard on 12 May 2009.[108]

Argentine President Cristina Fernández signed on 28 August 2009 an agreement
to adopt the ISDB-Tb system, joining Brazil, which has already implemented the
standard in its big cities.[109] On air service started from 28 April
2010.[110]

On 5 July 2010 the Bolivian chancellor signed an agreement with the Japanese
ambassador to Bolivia, choosing the Japanese system with the Brazilian
modifications ISDB-T (Integrated Services Digital Broadcasting
Terrestrial).[111][112]

In Brazil, the government chose a modified version of the Japanese ISDB-T
standard, called ISDB-Tb (or SBTVD) in June 2006. Digital broadcasts started
on 2 December 2007 in São Paulo and now it is under expansion all over the
country. As of 15 September 2009, metro areas of São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro,
Belo Horizonte, Brasília, Goiânia, Curitiba, Porto Alegre, Salvador, Campinas,
Vitória, Florianópolis, Uberlândia, São José do Rio Preto, Teresina, Santos,
Campo Grande, Fortaleza, Recife, João Pessoa, Sorocaba, Manaus, Belém,
Aracaju, Ribeirão Preto, Boa Vista, Macapá, Porto Velho, Rio Branco, São
Carlos, São José do Rio Preto, São Luís, Pirassununga, São José dos Campos,
Taubaté, Ituiutaba, Araraquara, Feira de Santana, Itapetininga, Sorocaba,
Presidente Prudente, Bauru, Campos dos Goytacazes, Londrina, Juiz de Fora,
Campina Grande, Caxias do Sul, Franca, Rio Claro and Cuiabá have digital
terrestrial broadcasting. By 2013 the digital signal was available in the
whole country. Analogue shutdown is scheduled for 2023.

On 14 September 2009, president Michelle Bachelet announced that the
government had finally decided on a digital television standard. Chile adopted
the ISDB-T Japanese standard (with the custom modifications made by Brazil).
Simulcasting began in 2010, with a projected analog switch-off in 2017.[113]

Colombia has chosen the European DVB-T standard on 28 August 2008. However, in
2012, Colombia adopted DVB-T2 as the national standard for terrestrial
television, replacing DVB-T, the previously selected standard for digital TV.

On December 28, 2010, private networks Caracol TV and RCN TV officially
started digital broadcasts[114] for Bogotá, Medellín and surrounding areas on
channels 14 and 15 UHF,[115] respectively. State-run Señal Colombia and Canal
Institucional had started test digital broadcasts earlier in 2010.[114]

The current coverage of DVB-T2 can be consulted on the website of the
organization "Tdt para Todos" which is the entity responsible for facilitating
its adoption.[116]

Ecuador chose Japanese-Brazilian standard ISDB-T as 6th country on 26 March
2010.[117][118][119]

Paraguay chose Japanese-Brazilian standard ISDB-T on 1 June 2010.[120][121]

On 23 April 2009, Peru chose the Brazilian variant of the Japanese digital
television standard ISDB-T. The Peruvian government signed an agreement with
its Japanese counterpart in order for the latter to fund the implementation of
the DTT platform in the country. The first network to be launched on digital
terrestrial television was TV Perú on 30 March 2010, using the ISDB-Tb
standard.[122][123][124] Currently, all the major stations in Lima are
broadcasting on DTT in high-definition. ATV was the first television channel
in the country to do digital test broadcasts in 2008, using either ATSC, DVB-T
and ISDB-T in order to see which of them was better. Eventually, ATV chose
ISDB-Tb, officially started broadcasting in HD; its first live TV show to be
aired in high-definition was Magaly TV on 30 August 2010. Frecuencia Latina
also began broadcasting on DTT in 14 September 2010 with a match of the Peru
women's national volleyball team in the 2010 FIVB Women's Volleyball World
Championship. Shortly after these events, America Television started
broadcasting on DTT.

Suriname is currently transitioning from analogue NTSC broadcasts to digital
ATSC and DVB-T broadcasts. Channel ATV started with ATSC broadcasts in the
Paramaribo area in June 2014, which was followed by ATSC broadcasts from
stations in Brokopondo, Wageningen and Albina. The stations in Brokopondo,
Wageningen and Albina broadcast both the channels of ATV (i.e. ATV and TV2)
and STVS, while the station in Paramaribo currently only broadcasts the ATV
channels.[125] The Telecommunication Authority of Suriname was originally
aiming at a full digital transition by June 2015,[125][126] but this was
criticized by broadcasters as being unfeasible.[127] However, the ITU has
documented both DVB-T and ATSC are in use].[128]

Uruguay chose the European DVB-T standard in August 2007,[129] however
disproved it and decided to adopt ISDB-T on 27 December 2010 to follow
neighbouring countries.[130][131][132]

In Venezuela, tests are being performed with full deployment to start
2008–2009. DTT will coexist with analogue standard television for some time,
until full deployment of the system on a nationwide level is accomplished. 30
September 2009, decided to employ Japanese ISDB-T system under cooperation
with Japan, and officially be agreed with Japan in early October
2009.[133][134]

On October 6, 2009, Venezuela has officially adopted ISDB-T with Brazilian
modifications. Transition from analog to digital is expected to take place in
the next 10 years.[135][136]

On March, 2012, Venezuela signed a $50M agreement to purchase 300,000 decoders
from Argentina to implement TDT in Caracas and later this year in some of the
most important cities, but only in the Government controlled TV Stations. NTSC
and TDT will coexist. The Government hopes to reach TDT the whole country's
population in 2 years. [ __ _permanent dead link_ ] HugeDomains.com -
InsideTele.com is for sale (Inside Tele) As of 2019, due to the Venezuelan
crisis, the digital television transition is paralysed and DTT development has
been frozen.

On the African continent the trend is still to use the European standard
"DVB-T2", which is the most modern system of broadcasting. Countries that have
adopted the standard are: Algeria, Angola, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Seychelles, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania,
Togo, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe.[137][138]

In March 2015 Inview Technology (a UK digital switch-off company based in
Cheshire and with local operations in Nigeria) was appointed by Nigeria's
government run National Broadcasting Commission (NBC) to enable digital
switchover from analogue[139] throughout the country and provide a Conditional
Access System, set-top box software and services including full EPG, Push
Video-On-Demand, a range of broadcasting applications such as news, public
service information and audience measurement services over the digital
terrestrial and satellite networks in Nigeria.[140]

Inview Nigeria and NCB will:

FreeTV will carry up to 30 free channels: the best of Nigeria TV and
international channels across news, movies, kids, music and general
entertainment _genres_.

A national standard set top box specification has been set which incorporates
a common operating system created by Inview. All boxes will require this
specification to view the channels and access value added services such as
interactive news, programme recording, internet applications and video on
demand.

As of March 2016, FreeTV is being operated by Inview and is an open platform
which enables any content or pay TV provider to broadcast their content so
that Nigerian consumers only have to buy one box to view all the content. Only
manufacturers licensed in Nigeria will receive the Inview operating system
required to access the channels and services, which will protect domestic
manufacturers and consumers from illegal grey imports.

To follow the transition from analog to digital in the field of terrestrial
television broadcasting, and to keep pace with these technological
international innovations, Tunisia through the Office of National Broadcasting
has planned the following phases to digitize its terrestrial broadcasting
networks:

First phase: Deployment, since 2001, of an experimental digital TV
broadcasting unit using DVB-T system, and MPEG-2 compression, implemented in
Boukornine site, to insure the coverage of Great Tunis (25% of population).
This experimental project highlighted the benefits of digitization which are :
-Better quality of Video and audio signals, -Increasing the capacity of
distribution networks through the transmission of a digital TV package
(bouquet): a layer of digital distribution network enables the transmission of
4 to 6 programs TV instead of a single TV program in the case of an analog
network -The economics of radio spectrum and the energy consumption.
-Introduction of new multimedia services. In preparatory phase, ONT has
prepared the frequency plan for digital terrestrial TV networks of and has
signed the final acts of the Regional Radio Communication Conference 2006 in
Geneva organized by the International Telecommunications Union, which
recommends to switch off analog broadcasting services around 2015 and their
replacement by digital broadcasting systems.

Second phase: This phase includes the completion of the two following
projects:

1- First part: Digitization of the transmission network between production
studios and different broadcasting stations. The network consists of 41
transmission stations spread throughout the country. This step represents the
first part of the Digital Terrestrial TV network, and its deployment is
completed during the period 2008-2009. The cost of this project is 27 million
dinars TTC.

2- Second part: National digital terrestrial TV broadcasting Network to
viewers, which consists of 17 DTTV stations spread throughout the country and
will be conducted under a contract including a vendor financing agreement with
the Thomson Grass Valley (France) company. The project came into force in
August 2009 and will be conducted during 2009-2010. Its cost is 13 million
dinars TTC.

The broadcasting of digital terrestrial transmissions has led to many
countries planning to phase out existing analogue broadcasts. This table shows
the launches of DTT and the closing down of analogue television in several
countries.

2006/03/01 Pay DTT[183][184]

2016-04-02 (ATV)  
2020-12-01 (TVB and RTHK)[191]

2012-03-31 in Iwate, Miyagi and Fukushima[224]

