A **direct numerical simulation (DNS)**[1] is a simulation in computational
fluid dynamics in which the Navier–Stokes equations are numerically solved
without any turbulence model. This means that the whole range of spatial and
temporal scales of the turbulence must be resolved. All the spatial scales of
the turbulence must be resolved in the computational mesh, from the smallest
dissipative scales (Kolmogorov microscales), up to the integral scale L
{\displaystyle L}
![L](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/103168b86f781fe6e9a4a87b8ea1cebe0ad4ede8),
associated with the motions containing most of the kinetic energy. The
Kolmogorov scale,  η {\displaystyle \eta } ![\\eta
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/e4d701857cf5fbec133eebaf94deadf722537f64),
is given by

where  ν {\displaystyle \nu } ![\\nu
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c15bbbb971240cf328aba572178f091684585468)
is the kinematic viscosity and  ε {\displaystyle \varepsilon } ![\\varepsilon
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a30c89172e5b88edbd45d3e2772c7f5e562e5173)
is the rate of kinetic energy dissipation. On the other hand, the integral
scale depends usually on the spatial scale of the boundary conditions.

To satisfy these resolution requirements, the number of points  N
{\displaystyle N}
![N](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/f5e3890c981ae85503089652feb48b191b57aae3)
along a given mesh direction with increments  h {\displaystyle h}
![h](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/b26be3e694314bc90c3215047e4a2010c6ee184a),
must be

so that the integral scale is contained within the computational domain, and
also

so that the Kolmogorov scale can be resolved.

Since

where  u ′ {\displaystyle u'}
![u'](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/bee645f272e64333868e2baa275419eca4ee0718)
is the root mean square (RMS) of the velocity, the previous relations imply
that a three-dimensional DNS requires a number of mesh points  N 3
{\displaystyle N^{3}}
![N^{{3}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/0c55dcbd0d1893c037f846f52adda4f714b3f7d9)
satisfying

where  R e {\displaystyle \mathrm {Re} } ![{\\mathrm
{Re}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/ce9a978f729af1a34028e60d45f484f0908e4be7)
is the turbulent Reynolds number:

Hence, the memory storage requirement in a DNS grows very fast with the
Reynolds number. In addition, given the very large memory necessary, the
integration of the solution in time must be done by an explicit method. This
means that in order to be accurate, the integration, for most discretization
methods, must be done with a time step,  Δ t {\displaystyle \Delta t}
![\\Delta
t](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/8c28867ecd34e2caed12cf38feadf6a81a7ee542),
small enough such that a fluid particle moves only a fraction of the mesh
spacing  h {\displaystyle h}
![h](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/b26be3e694314bc90c3215047e4a2010c6ee184a)
in each step. That is,

( C {\displaystyle C}
![C](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/4fc55753007cd3c18576f7933f6f089196732029)
is here the Courant number). The total time interval simulated is generally
proportional to the turbulence time scale  τ {\displaystyle \tau } ![\\tau
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/38a7dcde9730ef0853809fefc18d88771f95206c)
given by

Combining these relations, and the fact that  h {\displaystyle h}
![h](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/b26be3e694314bc90c3215047e4a2010c6ee184a)
must be of the order of  η {\displaystyle \eta } ![\\eta
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/e4d701857cf5fbec133eebaf94deadf722537f64),
the number of time-integration steps must be proportional to  L / ( C η )
{\displaystyle L/(C\eta )} ![L/\(C\\eta
\)](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/f41528fb7b31ca1249818d1c7952a97d98bd4e38).
By other hand, from the definitions for  R e {\displaystyle \mathrm {Re} }
![{\\mathrm
{Re}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/ce9a978f729af1a34028e60d45f484f0908e4be7),
η {\displaystyle \eta } ![\\eta
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/e4d701857cf5fbec133eebaf94deadf722537f64)
and  L {\displaystyle L}
![L](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/103168b86f781fe6e9a4a87b8ea1cebe0ad4ede8)
given above, it follows that

and consequently, the number of time steps grows also as a power law of the
Reynolds number.

One can estimate that the number of floating-point operations required to
complete the simulation is proportional to the number of mesh points and the
number of time steps, and in conclusion, the number of operations grows as  R
e 3 {\displaystyle \mathrm {Re} ^{3}} ![{\\displaystyle \\mathrm {Re}
^{3}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/2f795f5fc8fc60a155c4900319a3b516430f8283).

Therefore, the computational cost of DNS is very high, even at low Reynolds
numbers. For the Reynolds numbers encountered in most industrial applications,
the computational resources required by a DNS would exceed the capacity of the
most powerful computers currently available. However, direct numerical
simulation is a useful tool in fundamental research in turbulence. Using DNS
it is possible to perform "numerical experiments", and extract from them
information difficult or impossible to obtain in the laboratory, allowing a
better understanding of the physics of turbulence. Also, direct numerical
simulations are useful in the development of turbulence models for practical
applications, such as sub-grid scale models for large eddy simulation (LES)
and models for methods that solve the Reynolds-averaged Navier–Stokes
equations (RANS). This is done by means of "a priori" tests, in which the
input data for the model is taken from a DNS simulation, or by "a posteriori"
tests, in which the results produced by the model are compared with those
obtained by DNS.

