**Doge** (often /ˈdoʊdʒ/ _DOHJ_, /ˈdoʊɡ/ _DOHG_)[2] is an Internet meme that
became popular in 2013 and has had a resurgence in 2019. The meme typically
consists of a picture of a Shiba Inu dog accompanied by multicolored text in
Comic Sans font in the foreground. The text, representing a kind of internal
monologue, is deliberately written in a form of broken English.[1]

The meme is based on a 2010 photograph, and became popular in late 2013, being
named as _Know Your Meme'_s "top meme" of that year. A cryptocurrency based on
Doge, the Dogecoin, was launched in December 2013, and the Shiba Inu has been
featured on Josh Wise's NASCAR car as part of a sponsorship deal. Doge has
also been referenced by members of the United States Congress, a safety video
for Delta Air Lines, a Google Easter egg, and the video for the song "Word
Crimes" by "Weird Al" Yankovic.

Doge uses two-word phrases in which the first word is almost always one of
five modifiers ("so", "such", "many", "much", and "very"), and the departure
from correct English is to use the modifier with a word that it cannot
properly modify.[3] For example, "Much respect. So noble." uses the doge
modifiers but is not "proper" doge because the modifiers are used in a
formally correct fashion; the doge version would be "Much noble, so
respect."[3] In addition to these phrases, a doge utterance often ends with a
single word, most often "wow" but with "amaze" and "excite" also being
used.[3]

In April 2018, _The Daily Dot_ reported on a new variation of the doge meme in
which the image of the dog is liquified into other shapes. The spread of this
new meme was attributed to the YouTuber PewDiePie, who featured it in one of
his videos.[4]

Kabosu (Japanese: かぼす), the female Shiba Inu featured in the original meme, is
a pedigree puppy who was sent to an animal shelter when her puppy mill shut
down. She was adopted in 2008 by Japanese kindergarten teacher Atsuko Satō,
and named after the citrus fruit kabosu because Sato thought she had a round
face like the fruit.[5] Another Shiba Inu featured in the meme is Suki, a
female belonging to photographer Jonathan Fleming from San Francisco. His wife
had accidentally put a scarf in the wash, making it shrink. He took a
photograph of Suki wearing the scarf outside on a cold night in February
2010.[6]

Kabosu was first pictured in a 2010 blog post by Sato; afterwards, variations
of the pictures using overlaid Comic Sans text were posted from a Tumblr blog,
_Shiba Confessions_.[6][7][8][9] However, the use of the intentionally
misspelled "doge" dates back to June 2005, when it was mentioned in an episode
of _Homestar Runner_ 's puppet series.[2]

The most common pronunciations of "doge" are /ˈdoʊdʒ/ _DOHJ_ and /ˈdoʊɡ/
_DOHG_. In non-English speaking countries, "doge" is occasionally pronounced
/ˈdɒdʒ/ "dodge". Those unfamiliar or unacquainted with the meme also use the
pronunciations /ˈdɒɡi/ "doggie", /ˈdɒɡeɪ/ _DOG -ay_, /ˈdoʊɡeɪ/ _DOH -gay_, or
simply /ˈdɒɡ/ "dog".[2]

In August 2013, images of the meme were spammed on Reddit's r/MURICA subreddit
by 4chan's random imageboard, /b/.[10] Online searches for the meme began to
increase in July 2013.[6]

The meme was ranked at No. 12 on MTV's list of "50 Things Pop Culture Had Us
Giving Thanks For" in 2013.[11] Io9 compared the internal dialog of the Shiba
Inu dogs to lolspeak.[12] On December 13, Doge was named the "top meme" of
2013 by Know Your Meme.[13] A report on _The Daily Dot_ in December 2016 found
that Doge's popularity peaked in 2014 and then fell due to "overexposure and
co-option by advertisers and mainstream 'normies'", but remained stable since
then and returned to Tumblr's top 10 shared memes of the year in 2016.[14]

The Japanese perception is remarkably different; Kabosu and Satō are rather
known as a pet and owner rather than a meme, and her blog is the fourth-most
popular pet-related blog in the country as of December 2013. Reacting to the
meme, she explained, "To be honest, some pictures are strange for me, but it's
still funny! I'm very impressed with their skills and taste. Around me, nobody
knows about the doge meme. Maybe I don't understand memes very well, because
I'm living such an analog life." Satō has also expressed that she had learned
that "the risk of the internet is that anyone in the world can see my life on
my blog". Fleming stated that in his experience, the Shiba Inu breed has
become more recognized due to the meme.[6]

In late December 2013, members of the U.S. Congress produced material in the
meme's style. _The Huffington Post_ commented that Doge was "killed" because
of the Congress members' usage of the meme.[15][16]

Google created a Doge Easter egg: when _doge meme_ was entered into the
YouTube search bar, all the site's text would be displayed in colorful Comic
Sans, similar to the kind used by the meme.[17]

In December 2013, the Dogecoin was introduced as a new cryptocurrency, making
it the first cryptocurrency to be based on an Internet meme;[18][19][20] the
viral phenomenon, along with usage of the Comic Sans MS typeface, gave it "the
Internet density of a large star" according to Medium writer Quinn Norton.[21]
By early 2014, Doge's popularity was sustained by internet communities on
social media, accompanied by the rapid growth and acceptance of Dogecoin. In
April 2014, Doge experienced a second major media resurgence due to
revelations of the Dogecoin community's intent to sponsor Josh Wise in NASCAR
and place a picture of the Shiba Inu on his vehicle.[22][23] The car features
in downloadable content for the video game _NASCAR '14_.[24] Media outlets
have embraced the meme while reporting on the cryptocurrency and the car, with
titles featuring phrases such as "so wow" and "very vroom".[25][26]

In January 2014, Sydney-based web developers Katia Eirin and Bennett Wong
created _Doge Weather_ , a weather website and mobile app incorporating the
meme. _Doge Weather_ reports the temperature and weather conditions based on
the user's geographic location.[27][28] In April 2014, _Doge Weather_ became
available as a mobile app for iOS 7 costing 99¢.[27]

In mid-2014, the advertisement agency DDB Stockholm had Doge feature
prominently in an advertising campaign for the public transport company SL in
Stockholm, Sweden. The advertisement concerned the company's special summer
tickets, and featured Doge holding a public transport ticket in his mouth,
with phrases such as "many summer", "such cheap" and "very buy".[29] In the
video for "Weird Al" Yankovic's 2014 song "Word Crimes", a song about bad
grammar, a Doge tweet is used to illustrate the types of bad grammar
referenced in that part of the song.[30]

"Doge" was one of several additions to Dictionary.com in November 2015.[31]
The website defines it as not just the image macro and its variants, but also
the form of "language" that it utilizes.[32]

In the 2015 video game _The Legend of Zelda: Tri Force Heroes_ , a reference
to the meme can be found in the North American version only. When examining
one of the ancient bookshelves, the text reads "Still, coming here has at
least afforded me the rare chance to explore these ancient ruins. So ancient.
Such ruin." The reference was met with mixed views from fans of the
series.[33][34] In May 2016, Mozilla's Servo project incorporated the meme
into the logo.[35]

For April Fools' Day in 2017, China Central Television published a hoax story
of the death of Kabosu.[36][37]

