**DoggoLingo** , also referred to as woof, bork and **dog-speak** , is an
Internet language trend that is created from word conversion, meme lexicon,
and onomatopoeia. DoggoLingo is implied to be a dog's own idiom, and is
presented as what humans have long believed goes on in the canine brain. Elyse
Graham, assistant professor at Stony Brook University, describes DoggoLingo as
"upbeat, joyful, and clueless in a relentlessly friendly way".[1]

DoggoLingo appends various suffixes "-o", "-er", "-ino" to existing English
words (i.e. _dog_ turns into _doggo_ , _pup_ turns into _pupper_ ) and
DoggoLingo words that have been created (i.e. _pupper_ turns into _pupperino_
, _bork_ turns into _borker_ ). DoggoLingo relies heavily upon onomatopoeia.
Words such as _blep_ , _blop_ and _mlem_ , that describe the action of a dog
sticking out its tongue. Also, _bork_ , _boof_ , _woof_ to describe the
various canine barking sounds. DoggoLingo is simplistic and also creates words
based upon the appearance of a canine. For example, a dog with a fluffy coat
would be called a _floof_ or a _fluff_ depending upon the fur's visual
texture. The DoggoLingo follows the same rudimentary style to create its verbs
(i.e. _doin me a_ in place of the verb _to do_ ) and adjectives (i.e _heckin_
in place of the degree modifier _extremely_ ).

The exact origin of DoggoLingo is unknown. Various social media accounts such
as WeRateDogs (Twitter), Dogspotting (Facebook), as well as social news
aggregation and imageboard websites like 4chan, Reddit, or Tumblr have aided
in popularising the use of DoggoLingo by consistently using or hosting content
that uses the lingo on their Internet pages. In 2014, the Dogspotting Facebook
account gained popularity, especially in Australia where coincidentally adding
"-o" to the end of words is also a feature of Australian slang.[2]

Internet fan groups for other animals have adopted many of the conventions of
DoggoLingo for their own related languages for their preferred animals (like
_Posso_ or _Poss-speak_ for opossums). Lolcats may be a precursor to
DoggoLingo.

