**Hans** **Lundgren** (/ˈlʌndɡrən/; Swedish: [ˈdɔlːf ˈlɵnːdgreːn] (![About
this
sound](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Loudspeaker.svg/11px-
Loudspeaker.svg.png)listen); born 3 November 1957),[1] better known as **Dolph
Lundgren** , is a Swedish actor, filmmaker, and martial artist. Lundgren's
breakthrough came in 1985, when he starred in _Rocky IV_ as the imposing
Soviet Union boxer Ivan Drago. Since then, he has starred in more than 40
films, almost all of them in the action genre.

Lundgren received a degree in chemical engineering from the Royal Institute of
Technology in the early 1980s and a master's degree in chemical engineering
from the University of Sydney in 1982. He holds the rank of 3rd _dan_ black
belt in Kyokushin karate and was European champion in 1980–81. While in
Sydney, he became a bodyguard for Jamaican singer Grace Jones and began a
relationship with her. He received a Fulbright scholarship to MIT and moved to
Boston. Jones convinced him to leave the university and move to New York City
to be with her and begin acting, where, after a short stint as a model and
bouncer at the Manhattan nightclub The Limelight, Lundgren got a small debut
role as a KGB henchman in the James Bond film _A View to a Kill_.

After appearing in _Rocky IV_ , Lundgren portrayed He-Man in the 1987 science
fantasy film _Masters of the Universe_ , Lt. Rachenko in _Red Scorpion_ (1988)
and Frank Castle in the 1989 film _The Punisher_. Throughout the 1990s he
appeared in films such as _I Come in Peace_ (1990), _Cover-Up_ (1991),
_Showdown in Little Tokyo_ (1991), _Universal Soldier_ film series (1992,
2009, 2012), _Joshua Tree_ (1993), _Pentathlon_ (1994), _Men of War_ (1994),
_Johnny Mnemonic_ (1995), _The Shooter_ (1995), _Silent Trigger_ (1996), _The
Peacekeeper_ (1997), and _Blackjack_ (1998). In 2004 he directed his first
film, _The Defender_ , and subsequently directed _The Mechanik_ (2005),
_Missionary Man_ (2007), _Command Performance_ (2009), and _Icarus_ (2010),
also starring in all of them.

After a long spell performing in direct-to-video films since 1995, Lundgren
returned to Hollywood in 2010 with the role of Gunnar Jensen in _The
Expendables_ , alongside Sylvester Stallone and an all-action star cast. He
reprised his role in _The Expendables 2_ (2012) and _The Expendables 3_
(2014). Also in 2014, he co-starred in _Skin Trade_ , an action thriller about
human trafficking he co-wrote and produced. The film marks his third
collaboration with Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa, the previous two being _Showdown in
Little Tokyo_ (1991) and _Bridge of Dragons_ (1999). He reprised his role of
Ivan Drago in _Creed II_ (2018), and is due to reprise his role as Gunner
Jensen in _The Expendables 4_ (2020).[2][3] He appears in _Sharknado 5: Global
Swarming_ (2017), playing the protagonist's son Gil as an adult, and in
_Aquaman_ (2018), playing the father of Mera. He also had a recurring role in
the fifth season of _Arrow_ (2012-present), playing antagonist Konstantin
Kovar.

Hans Lundgren was born on 3 November 1957 in Spånga, the son of Sigrid
Birgitta ( _née_ Tjerneld), a language teacher, and Karl Johan Hugo Lundgren,
an engineer and economist for the Swedish government. He lived in Spånga until
the age of 13, when he moved to his grandparents' home in Nyland,
Ångermanland.[4][5][6] Some sources wrongly state 1959 as his year of
birth,[7][8] but Lundgren himself has confirmed it to be 1957.[9][10][11] He
has two sisters and an older brother;[6] he was raised in the Lutheran
church.[12] Lundgren claims his father was physically abusive and vented his
frustration on his wife and eldest son. He has stated that, during his
tirades, his father would call him a "loser," which motivated him later as he
grew more ambitious to prove himself. But he also said, "I still love my
father, no matter what happened. There are many things about him I still
admire. As a child, I was probably too much like him, very stubborn—perhaps
that's what he couldn't deal with."[6] He has cited his troubled relationship
with his father as the reason he developed a desire to participate in heavy
contact sports such as boxing and karate.[6]

Lundgren has said that, as a child, he was insecure and suffered from
allergies, describing himself as a "runt".[6][13] He showed a keen interest in
drumming and had aspirations to become a rock star.[6] At age seven, he tried
judo and Gōjū-ryū. He took up Kyokushin karate at the age of 10, and began
lifting weights as a teenager.[13] Lundgren stated that "My dad always told me
that if I wanted to make something special with my life, I had to go to
America."[6] After graduating from high school with straight A's, he spent
some time in the United States in the 1970s on various academic scholarships,
studying chemical engineering at Washington State University and Clemson
University. He studied chemical engineering for a year at Washington State
University,[14] prior to serving his mandatory one year in the Swedish Marine
Corps at the Amphibious Ranger School. In the late 1970s, he enrolled at the
Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm and graduated with a degree in
chemical engineering.[6] The name "Dolph" comes from a distant relative on his
mother's side.

Amidst his years of studying, Lundgren honed his karate skills by training
hard in the dojo for five years, attaining the rank of 2nd _dan_ black belt in
Kyokushin in 1978. He captained the Swedish Kyokushin karate team, and was a
formidable challenger at the 1979 World Open Tournament (arranged by the
Kyokushin Karate Organization) when he was only a green belt. He won the
European championships in 1980 and 1981, and a heavyweight tournament in
Australia in 1982.[15] In 1982, Lundgren graduated with a master's degree in
chemical engineering from the University of Sydney. During his time in Sydney,
he earned a living as a bouncer in a nightclub in the renowned King's Cross
area.

Lundgren was awarded a Fulbright Scholarship to the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology in 1983. However, while preparing for the move to Boston, he was
spotted in the nightclub he worked at in Sydney and was hired by Grace Jones
as a bodyguard, and the two became lovers.[16] Their relationship developed
dramatically, and he moved with her to New York City.[17] While living with
Jones in her New York City apartment, Lundgren dabbled in modeling at the Zoli
Agency but was described as "a bit too tall and muscular for a model's size
40".[6] He earned a living as a bouncer at the Manhattan nightclub The
Limelight; housed in the former Episcopal Church of the Holy Communion,
working with Chazz Palminteri.[6] In the daytime, he studied drama at the
Warren Robertson Theatre Workshop and has said that "my time in New York City
opened up my adolescent Swedish eyes to a multitude of different people and
lifestyles, mostly in the arts. I hung out with Andy Warhol, Keith Haring,
Iman and Steve Rubell, danced at Studio 54, and studied acting with Andie
MacDowell and Tom Hulce."[6] Friends told him he should be in movies.[6] He
would later quit studying at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology after
two weeks to pursue acting.[18]

On the set of the James Bond film _A View to a Kill_ , Jones suggested that he
try out for a part in the film, which led to his feature film debut playing
the very minor role of a suited KGB henchman named Venz.[19][20] In the film,
Lundgren appears in the scene in which the KGB's General Gogol (Walter Gotell)
confronts Max Zorin (Christopher Walken) about leaving the KGB, at a racing
ground and ends in a minor brawl in which Lundgren's character Venz points a
gun at Zorin. Roger Moore, in his last performance as James Bond, once
memorably said, "Dolph is larger than Denmark".[16] Lundgren found the
entertainment business more attractive and rewarding than chemical
engineering, so he decided to pursue a career in acting despite having no
formal training.[16] Upon learning that Sylvester Stallone was seeking an
imposing fighter to play Ivan Drago in _Rocky IV_ (1985), Lundgren sent videos
and pictures of himself to a distant contact of Stallone, eventually reaching
him. Lundgren tried out for the role, but as he himself has stated, he was
initially turned down because he was too tall.[19]

However, he eventually beat 5,000 other hopefuls to land his breakout role
opposite Stallone, Carl Weathers, and Brigitte Nielsen. To improve his
physique and athletic abilities, he trained intensely in bodybuilding and
boxing for five months before the film was shot. Lundgren said, "We trained
six days a week—weights in the morning for about an hour, then boxing in the
afternoon. We did a split of chest and back one day and then shoulders, legs,
and arms the next. We boxed for an hour and a half, practiced the fight
choreography, and did bag work and abs."[21] He weighed 235 pounds (107 kg) –
245 pounds (111 kg) during filming,[21] but in the film he was billed at 261
pounds (118 kg); one publisher said of Drago, "He's a hulking 261 pounds of
merciless fighting machine, the best that Soviet science & medicine can
create".[22] His character's lines "If he dies, he dies" and "I must break
you" are amongst the best known of the _Rocky_ series, and have often been
cited in popular culture.[23][24] In an interview, Sylvester Stallone said,
"During [the filming of] _Rocky IV_ , Dolph had hit me so hard I had swelling
around the heart and had to stay in intensive care at St. John's Hospital for
four days."[25] Lundgren later fought in a real boxing match against former
UFC fighter Oleg Taktarov, and lost via decision.[26] Lundgren has highlighted
the premiere of _Rocky IV_ at Westwood Movie Theatre as the moment which
changed his life, remarking, "I walked in to a Westwood movie theater as Grace
Jones' boyfriend and walked out ninety minutes later as the movie star Dolph
Lundgren. I was shell-shocked for years from the mind-boggling and daunting
experience of being a student-athlete from tiny Sweden suddenly having to live
up a new action-star persona."[6]

Lundgren received his first lead role as the mighty He-Man in _Masters of the
Universe_ (1987), based on the popular children's toyline and cartoon. He
starred alongside Frank Langella, Meg Foster, Chelsea Field, Billy Barty and
Courteney Cox. Lundgren weighed his all-time heaviest during the filming at
250 pounds (110 kg).[21] The film was a critical failure and viewed as far too
violent for a family picture.[27][28] It is referred to as a "flop" by
_Variety_ magazine,[29] and has a 13% "rotten" rating at Rotten Tomatoes.[30]
Lundgren was criticized for being too wooden as a leading man, and it was
dismissed as "a glossy fantasy starring monosyllabic Dolph Lundgren."[31]

One author explained why Lundgren would never succeed as a leading actor in
Hollywood, "Lundgren is limited by his size and dead pan delivery: though
often compared to Arnold, he has less range."[32] Lundgren released a workout
video on VHS in 1987 called _Maximum Potential_.[33]

He next starred in Joseph Zito's _Red Scorpion_ in 1989, opposite M. Emmet
Walsh, Al White, T. P. McKenna and Carmen Argenziano. The plot centers on
Lundgren's character Nikolai, a Soviet Spetsnaz-trained KGB agent who is sent
to an African country where Soviet, Czechoslovakian and Cuban forces support
the government's fight against an anti-communist rebel movement. Nikolai is
ordered to assassinate the movement's leader, but eventually switches sides.
The film was partly shot in Namibia and it was claimed that Grace Jones joined
him during production in Swakopmund, insisting on staying in a $3000-a-month
villa, even though his girlfriend at the time was reported to be Paula
Barbieri.[34] The film was poorly received and has an 11% "rotten" rating at
Rotten Tomatoes. Stephen Holden of _The New York Times_ said, "Dolph
Lundgren's pectorals are the real stars of _Red Scorpion,_ an action-adventure
movie set in the fictional African country of Mombaka. Filmed from below so
that one has the sense of peering up at a massive kinetic sculpture, his
glistening torso, which over the course of the film is subjected to assorted
tortures, is the movie's primary visual focus whenever the action slows down.
And since Mr. Lundgren remains stone-faced, rarely speaking except to issue
commands in a surprisingly hesitant monotone, his heaving chest actually
communicates more emotion than his mumbling lips."[35]

Lundgren then starred as Marvel Comics character Frank Castle (a.k.a. The
Punisher) in the 1989 film _The Punisher_. The film was directed by Mark
Goldblatt, with a screenplay by Boaz Yakin. Although it is based on the Marvel
Comics character, the film changes many details of the original comic book
origin and the main character does not wear the trademark "skull". _The
Punisher_ was filmed in Sydney, Australia and also featured Louis Gossett,
Jr., Jeroen Krabbé, Kim Miyori, and Barry Otto.[36] The film received mainly
negative reviews, currently holds a 24% "rotten" rating at Rotten
Tomatoes.[37] Christopher Null gave the film 1 out of 5, stating the film was
"marred by cheeseball sets and special effects, lame fight sequences, and some
of the worst acting ever to disgrace the screen."[38] Whilst criticizing the
film's storyline and acting, _Time Out_ magazine concluded the film was
"destructive, reprehensible, and marvelous fun".[39]

In 1990, Lundgren starred in Craig R. Baxley's sci-fi thriller _I Come in
Peace_ (also known as _Dark Angel_ ) opposite Brian Benben, Betsy Brantley,
Matthias Hues and Jay Bilas. Lundgren plays Jack Caine, a tough Houston cop
with an inner sensitivity,[40] who does not let the rules of police procedure
prevent him pursuing his mission to wipe out the White Boys, a gang of white
collar drug dealers who killed his partner while he was waylaid stopping a
convenience store robbery. Lundgren said of his role, "What attracted me to
Dark Angel is that I get to do more than just action. There's some romance,
some comedy, some drama. I actually have some clever dialogue in this one. I
get to act."[41] One author said "Universe (1987) or Dark Angel (1990),
demonstrates that nature and his [Lundgren's] hairdresser have suited him
perfectly to Nazi genetically engineered baddie roles."[42]

In 1991, Lundgren starred in Manny Coto's action film _Cover Up_ opposite
Louis Gossett Jr.. Lundgren portrays Mike Anderson, a tough American reporter
and US Marine veteran who finds his own life in jeopardy after stumbling
across a political cover-up over a Middle Eastern terrorist plan to release
toxic gas and kill thousands of people. The primary terrorist group in the
film is the fictional group Black October, in reference to Black
September.[43] The film was shot in Israel and Lundgren stayed at the famous
King David Hotel.[43]

Although the film was not a major success, former Research Fellow at
Australia's National Film & Sound Archive Robert Cettl, in his 2009 book
_Terrorism in American cinema: an analytical filmography, 1960–2008_ argues
that the film reveals an alarmingly realist insight into US-Middle Eastern
politics and terrorism since the 2000s, dealing with an al-Qaeda-esque
terrorist organization and the conspiracy theories that some believe the US
government is using the Middle East as a cover-up.[43]

Later in 1991, Lundgren appeared in martial arts action film _Showdown in
Little Tokyo_ opposite Brandon Lee, Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa and Tia Carrere.
Lundgren plays a police sergeant named Kenner working in Little Tokyo, Los
Angeles who is partnered with Johnny Murata (Lee), a Japanese American who are
sent to infiltrate the operations of new Japanese drug gang named the Iron
Claw manufacturing a lethal methamphetamine while using a local brewery and
nightclub as a front for the operation. Along the way, Kenner discovers that
Yoshida (Tagawa), the head of the drug gang, is a member of the Yakuza who
killed his parents in front of him as a young boy in Japan and the case
becomes violent and personal.[44][45] The film received a mainly negative
reception from critics and was criticized for its violence; Vincent Canby of
the New York Times described it as "violent, but spiritless."[46] _Variety_
wrote "Lundgren can hold his own with other action leads as an actor and could
easily be Van Damme-marketable if only he'd devote as much attention to
quality control as he does to pectoral development."[47] David J. Fox of the
_Los Angeles Times_ , however, described the film as a "class act".[48]

In 1992, Lundgren starred in one of the biggest blockbusters of the year in
the sci-fi action picture _Universal Soldier_ directed by Roland Emmerich.
Lundgren (as Sergeant Andrew Scott) and Jean-Claude Van Damme (as Luc
Deveraux) play U.S. soldiers during the Vietnam War who are sent to secure a
village against North Vietnamese forces. However they end up shooting each
other dead after Devereaux discovers that Scott has gone insane and has
resorted to mutilating the villagers and barbarically cutting off their ears,
taking an innocent girl and boy hostage.[49] They are later reanimated in a
secret Army project along with a large group of other previously dead soldiers
and sent on a mission as GR operatives. At the 1992 Cannes Film Festival, Van
Damme and Lundgren were involved in a verbal altercation that almost turned
physical when both men pushed each other only to be separated, but it was
believed to have only been a publicity stunt.[50][51] _Universal Soldier_
opened in theatres on 10 July 1992, a moderate success domestically with
$36,299,898 in US ticket sales, but a major blockbuster worldwide, making over
$65 million overseas, which earned the film a total of $102 million worldwide,
on a $23 million budget.[52] Despite being a box office hit however, it was
not well-received; mainstream critics dismissed the movie as a _Terminator 2_
clone.[50][53][54][55] Film critic Roger Ebert said, "it must be fairly
thankless to play lunks who have to fight for the entire length of a movie
while exchanging monosyllabic idiocies", including it in his book _I hated,
hated, hated this movie_.[50][51]

In 1993, Lundgren starred opposite Kristian Alfonso and George Segal in
_Joshua Tree_ , directed by BAFTA-winning stunt coordinator Vic Armstrong.[56]
Lundgren plays Wellman Anthony Santee, a former racecar driver who has turned
to hauling exotic stolen cars with his friend Eddie Turner (Ken Foree). One
day he is framed by police officer Frank Severance (Segal) for the murder of a
highway patrolman, also killing his friend Eddie. Santee is sent to prison
after recovering in a prison hospital, but escapes during transfer and takes a
female hostage named Rita Marrick (Alfonso) at a gas station, not suspecting
that she's a cop. On the run from the law, involving exotic cars and desert
scenery, Santee must prove his innocence and prove Severance guilty of being
involved in the car ring and for murder. Much of the film was filmed in the
Alabama Hills of the Sierra Nevada and the desert of the Joshua Tree National
Park of southeast California.[57]

In 1994, Lundgren starred in Bruce Malmuth's _Pentathlon_ as an East German
Olympic gold medalist pentathlete on the run from an abusive coach (David
Soul).[58] Lundgren trained with the U.S. pentathlon team in preparation for
the role,[59] which later led to him being selected to serve as the (non-
competing) Team Leader of the 1996 U.S. Olympic Modern Pentathlon team during
the Atlanta Games, to promote the image of the sport and to coordinate
planning and other details between the team and the United States Olympic
Committee.[60] The film was seen negatively by most critics; _Film Review_
said it was "appallingly acted and monotonous"[61] and Video Movie Guide 2002
described it as a "silly Cold War thriller".[62]

Later in 1994, Lundgren appeared in Perry Lang's _Men of War_ (scripted by
John Sayles) alongside Charlotte Lewis and BD Wong as Nick Gunar, a former
Special Ops soldier who leads a group of mercenaries to a treasure island in
the South China Sea. The film was mainly shot in Thailand, with Krabi and
Phong Nga making up most of the island scenery. The film was well received by
some critics. One author said " _Men of War_ invokes the most vividly
remembered fighting in a foreign land of recent Western history. This
innovation, associating the muscle image with the Vietnam experience, is
carried over into other contemporary muscle films."[63] Another said, "fine
performances by an all-star Dolph Lundgren as a mercenary assigned to
"convince" a cast in this offbeat and disturbing film."[64]

In 1995, Lundgren appeared in Robert Longo's _Johnny Mnemonic_ , co-starring
Keanu Reeves. The film portrays screenwriter William Gibson's dystopian
cyberpunk view of the future with the world dominated by megacorporations and
with strong East Asian influences.[65] Reeves plays the title character, a man
with a cybernetic brain implant designed to store information. Lundgren plays
Karl Honig, a Jesus-obsessed hit man and street preacher who wears a robe and
carries a shepherd's staff.[65][66] The film was shot on location in Toronto
and Montreal in 12 weeks, filling in for the film's Newark, New Jersey and
Beijing settings.[67] The film was premiered in Japan first on 15 April 1995
and features a previously composed score by Michael Danna, different editing,
and more scenes with Lundgren and Japanese star Takeshi Kitano. Critical
response was negative overall; Roger Ebert said, "Johnny Mnemonic is one of
the great gestures of recent cinema, a movie which doesn't deserve one
nanosecond of serious analysis."[68] The film was a financial disappointment,
grossing $19,075,720 in the domestic American market against its $26m budget.
The cloak worn by Lundgren in the film is now located in the lobby of the
Famous Players Coliseum in Mississauga, Ontario, it was his last theatrical
release film until 2010.[69] Later in 1995, Lundgren appeared in Ted
Kotcheff's _The Shooter_ , an action drama in which he plays Michael Dane, a
U.S. Marshall who gets caught up in politics when he is hired to solve the
assassination of a Cuban ambassador.

The Motion Picture Guide to the films of 1996 said, "in peak condition, Dolph
Lundgren leaps trains, kicks the crap out of assailants, and handles a rifle
like a pro. He's still a terrific athlete, but shows signs of histrionic
mobility here."[70]

In 1996, Lundgren starred in Russell Mulcahy's _Silent Trigger_ , about a
sniper (Lundgren) and his female spotter (played by Gina Bellman).[71]
Lundgren plays a former Special Forces agent who joins a secretive government
agency (called "The Agency") as an assassin.[72] The movie takes place in and
around an unfinished city skyscraper, shot in Montreal.[73] The Motion Picture
Guide to the films of 1997 said, "this stylish but empty thriller gives
square-jawed Dolph Lundgren another shot at straight-to-video
immortality".[71]

In 1997, Dolph starred in Frédéric Forestier's _The Peacekeeper_ , playing
Major Frank Cross of the US Air Force and the only man who can prevent the
president being assassinated and with the ability to thwart an imminent
nuclear holocaust. The threat is from a terrorist group, which has stolen the
President's personal communications computer with the capability of launching
the US arsenal to threaten global security. The film co-starred Michael
Sarrazin, Montel Williams, Roy Scheider and Christopher Heyerdahl, and was
shot on location in Montreal.[74] The film was praised for its exciting action
sequences.[75] Doug Pratt described the first half of the film as "excellent"
and described Dolph's character as "tenacious",[76] although Robert Cettl
wrote "the Peacekeeper trades on the presence of B-movie action star Dolph
Lundgren, an actor who never became as popular as his action contemporaries
Jean-Claude Van Damme and Steven Seagal."[77]

In 1998, he appeared in Jean-Marc Piché's action/supernatural horror film _The
Minion_ alongside Françoise Robertson Lundgren portrays Lukas Sadorov, a
middle eastern templar and member of an order who are charged with guarding
the gateway to Hell that, if opened, will unleash all evil.[72] The only thing
that can open it is a key which is sought by the Minion, a demonic spirit that
transfers itself into the nearby host body when his previous one is killed
off. Awakening in New York City, the Minion tracks down Karen Goodleaf as
Lukas arrives to America to protect her and the key. Michael Haag in his book
_Templars: History and Myth: From Solomon's Temple to the Freemasons_ (2009)
said, "The budget for this film was $12 million. A pity they did not spend a
cent on research (citing that one reference was 600 years out) ... Lundgren is
a butt-kicking Templar monk with a spiked leather glove whose sacred duty it
is to do what the Templars have always done and stop a key that has kept the
Anti-christ imprisoned for thousands of years from falling into the right
hands.".[78] The DVD and Video Guide of 2005 described the film as being
"possibly one of the worst films ever".[64]

Later in 1998, Dolph appeared alongside Bruce Payne and Claire Stansfield in
_Sweepers_ as Christian Erickson, a leading demolition expert and head of an
elite team of specialists, trained to disarm mine fields in a humanitarian
minesweeping operation in Angola.[79] In the event his son is killed and he
discovers that mines are being planted during the war to kill people in the
area. The film was a joint American and South African production. The Video
Guide to 2002 said, "that noise you hear isn't the numerous on-screen
explosions but action star Lundgren's career hitting rock bottom."[80] He also
featured in the TV pilot _Blackjack_ (directed by John Woo) as a former US
Marshal who has a phobia of the color white, who becomes the bodyguard and
detective of a young supermodel (Kam Heskin) who is the target of a psychotic
assassin (Phillip MacKenzie).[81][82] Shot on location in Toronto, the film
was originally meant to be the pilot episode of a series focusing around his
character, Jack Devlin[82] but it was not accepted as a series as it was
poorly received. One review said "the narrative is laughably stupid" and the
DVD and Video Guide to 2005 said, "dull, lightweight, made-for-TV action fully
to a satisfying climax".[64][83]

In 1999, he appeared in Isaac Florentine's _Bridge of Dragons_ as a "human
killing machine" mercenary named Warchikj alongside Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa, who
Lundgren had previously worked with in the 1991 film _Showdown in Little
Tokyo_ , Valerie Chow, Gary Hudson, John Bennett and Scott L.
Schwartz.[72][84] He then starred in _Storm Catcher_ alongside Mystro Clark
and Robert Miano under director Anthony Hickox, portraying a military pilot
who is falsely accused of treason in a plot to overthrow the US
Government.[72][85] He is blackmailed into plotting an attack in which he
would bomb Washington with a new jet called the "Storm Catcher" by a renegade
general (Miano). _Film review_ dismissed the film and Lundgren's performance
as "more Lundgren lunacy".[86] Finally he starred in Hickox's next picture,
_Jill Rips_ , based on a 1987 novel by Scottish writer Frederic Lindsay. He
portrays Matt Sorenson, a former boxer and San Francisco cop who avenges the
brutal death of his younger brother, Michael. Intent on finding his brother's
killer, Sorenson infiltrates the powerful inner world of politics, business
intrigue and casual sex and sadomasochism.[87] His obsession to discover the
killer's identity mounts as a series of other men are found murdered in a
similar fashion, and he loses all objectivity and becomes a vigilante. The DVD
and Video Guide to 2005 said, "not very believable but, as usual, it's fun to
watch Dolph Lundgren in action."[64] _Film Review_ "shuddered" at the concept
of the film and remarked that Lundgren "should be a long-forgotten action-
star."[88]

In 2000, Lundgren starred in _The Last Warrior_ as Captain Nick Preston under
director Sheldon Lettich. This post apocalyptic movie is set in 2006 in the
context of a 9.5-magnitude earthquake which kills millions of people, with
Preston leading a motley military patrol on the island to help survivors in
the pole shift-affected world.[56] The film was partly shot in Eilat, Israel.
Later in 2000, Dolph appeared in Damian Lee's _Agent Red_ (also known as
_Captured_ ), alongside Alexander Kuznetsov, Natalie Radford and Randolph
Mantooth. The film is set during the Cold War, and is about two soldiers
trapped on a submarine with a group of terrorists who plan to use a chemical
weapon against the United States. Lundgren's character, Matt Hendricks, must
work with his wife, a virologist, to prevent the scenario occurring.[89] After
the film was completed, producer Andrew Stevens thought it was too poor to be
released and multiple people had to be hired to at least make the film half-
competent.[90] The film was very poorly received, given its "shoestring
budget"; the DVD and Film Guide of 2005 wrote, "low-budget mess stars Dolph
Lundgren as a navy special operations commander trying to keep a deadly virus
out of the hands of terrorists. This subpar effort sinks to the bottom of the
ocean in a tidal wave of cliche."[91] During an interview on _The Tonight
Show_ with Jay Leno in May 2008, _Gladiator_ director Ridley Scott said
Lundgren had been considered for the part of undefeated fighter Tigris of Gaul
in 2000, but was eventually rejected because "as an actor, he just didn't fit
in with what we were trying to achieve".[92]

In 2001, Lundgren starred in _Hidden Agenda_ , directed by Marc S. Grenier. He
plays Jason Price, an ex-FBI agent who protects a witness. In 2003, Lundgren
featured in Sidney J. Furie's _Detention_ , opposite Alex Karzis, Kata Dobó
and Anthony J. Mifsud. He portrays a soon to be retired high school history
teacher and ex-Special Forces soldier Sam Decker who has one last detention to
proctor; he must band together the trouble makers and misfits in detention to
defeat a drug ring intent on taking over the school.[93][94]

In 2004, he starred in an unusually high number of films. He first appeared
opposite Polly Shannon in _Direct Action_ under Sidney J. Furie, portraying
Sergeant Frank Gannon, an officer who has spent the last three years on the
Direct Action Unit (DAU) task force, fighting gang crime and corruption and
after he leaves he is hunted down by former colleagues for betraying the
brotherhood.[95] Next he appeared in Ed Bye's _Fat Slags_ , a film adaption of
a comic strip _The Fat Slags_ which appeared in the "alternative" British
comic _Viz_. His role was little more than a cameo role alongside Geri
Halliwell, Naomi Campbell and Angus Deayton. Reviews of the film were so poor
that it remains on the IMDb's Bottom 100 as one of the worst movies ever
made.[96] He next appeared in Christopher Kulikowski's science fiction picture
_Retrograde_ alongside Gary Daniels and Joe Sagal. It tells the story of "a
group of genetically unique people who travel back in time to prevent the
discovery of meteors containing deadly bacteria."[97] Shot in Italy, the film
received the support of the Film Fund of Luxembourg.[97] Finally he made his
directorial debut, replacing Sidney J. Furie who got ill during pre-
production, with _The Defender_ , in which he also starred alongside Shakara
Ledard and Jerry Springer, who played the President of the United States.
Lundgren plays Lance Rockford, the bodyguard of the head of the National
Security Agency, Roberta Jones (Caroline Lee-Johnson), in a war on terror.[
_citation needed_ ]

In 2005, Lundgren starred and directed his second picture _The Mechanik_ (The
Russian Specialist), playing a retired Russian Special Forces hit man Nikolai
"Nick" Cherenko caught in the crossfire with Russian mobsters. Sky Movies
remarked that _The Mechanik_ is "hardcore death-dealing from the Nordic
leviathan" and said that "The Mechanik delivers all the no-nonsense gunplay
you'd want of a Friday night".[98]

In 2006, Lundgren played gladiator Brixos in the Italian-made
historical/biblical drama, _The Inquiry_ ( _L'inchiesta_ ), also known as _The
Final Inquiry_ , alongside Daniele Liotti, Mónica Cruz, Max von Sydow, F.
Murray Abraham and Ornella Muti. It is the remake of the 1986 Italian film
directed by Damiano Damiani and starring Keith Carradine and Harvey
Keitel.[99] Set in AD 35 in the Roman Empire, the story follows a fictional
Roman general named Titus Valerius Taurus, a veteran of campaigns in Germania,
who is sent to Judea by the emperor Tiberius to investigate the possibility of
the divinity of the recently crucified Jesus.[99] The film, shot on location
in Tunisia and Bulgaria, featured a score from Andrea Morricone, the son of
the acclaimed film score composer Ennio Morricone.[99] It premiered at the
Capri, Hollywood and the Los Angeles Italia Film Festival.[99] One reviewer on
a website catering for historical movies said of the film, "The Final Inquiry
is one of those movies you are glad you ran into.... I had such low
expectations for this movie, but was glad to have been proven wrong. I know
about the negative reviews this movie has gotten and some of the criticism is
well deserved while some of it is a bit unfair."[100]

In the same year, he appeared in the music video "Kosmosa" sung by the Russian
singer Irson Kudikova.

In 2007, Lundgren directed and starred in the Mongolia-based action adventure,
_Diamond Dogs_. Lundgren portrays the character of Xander Ronson, a mercenary
hired by a group of American fortune hunters to act as their guide and
bodyguard, while they search for a priceless Buddhist artifact deep within the
Chinese wilderness. They get more than they bargained for, however, as they
come face to face with Russian mercenaries also after the artifact. The film,
a Canadian-Chinese production, was shot on location in Inner Mongolia.[101]
Later in 2007, Lundgren wrote, directed and starred in _Missionary Man_
alongside Charles Solomon Jr.. Described as a "modern western" by
Lundgren,[102] He plays a lone, Bible-preaching stranger named Ryder who comes
into a small Texas town on his 1970's Harley-Davidson motorcycle to attend the
funeral of his good friend J.J., a local Native American carpenter, only to
later get mixed up in a series of brawls with a local gang. According to
Lundgren, it had long been a desire of his to direct a western, having long
been a fan of Clint Eastwood and John Wayne, yet he did not want to spend the
time and money building an old western town and hiring horses, so decided to
set it in modern times with a motorbike instead of entering the town on a
horse in the manner than Clint Eastwood would.[102] Lundgren's co-writer,
Frank Valdez's wife's brother happened to be a notable actor working in Texas
and invited Lundgren's team to shoot there.[102] The film was shot on location
in Waxahachie, south of Dallas and was produced by Andrew Stevens and it was
specially screened at the 2008 AFI Dallas Film Festival.[102][103]

In 2008, Lundgren starred opposite Michael Paré in the direct to video action
flick _Direct Contact_. He plays the role of Mike Riggins, an imprisoned ex-US
Special forces operative in Eastern Europe, who is offered his freedom and
money to rescue an American woman, Ana Gale, who has been kidnapped by a
ruthless warlord. This was followed by another direct to video film _Command
Performance_ (2009), a hostage action drama in which Lundgren, a proficient
musician in real life, plays a rock drummer forced to face terrorists at a
concert in Moscow. The film co-starred Canadian pop singer Melissa Smith,
playing a world-famous pop singer in the film and his own daughter Ida on her
screen debut, who played one of the daughters of the Russian president. The
story was inspired by a concert Madonna put on for Russian President Vladimir
Putin, although Dolph has also likened the pop singer to Britney
Spears.[104][105] Filming took place over 5 weeks between August and September
2008 in Sofia, Bulgaria and Moscow, Russia.[106] The film premiered at the
Ischia Global Film & Music Festival on 18 July 2009.[107]

In 2009, The Dolph Lundgren Scholarship was instituted in his name, which is
awarded to the student with the best grades at Ådalsskolan in Kramfors, the
school where he himself studied.[108] Lundgren then reunited with Jean-Claude
Van Damme in _Universal Soldier: Regeneration_ , where he plays Andrew Scott's
clone. The film was released theatrically in the Middle East and Southeast
Asia and directly to video in the United States and other parts of the world.
Since its release, the film has received better than average reviews for a
straight-to-DVD franchise sequel, with film critic Brian Orndorf giving the
film a B, calling it "moody, pleasingly quick-draw, and knows when to quit,
making the _Universal Soldier_ brand name bizarrely vital once again."[109]
Dread Central gave it 3 out of 5 knives, saying "there is almost nothing but
solid b-level action until the credits roll."[110] On the negative side, Pablo
Villaça said in his review that while he praised Van Damme's performance, he
criticized that of Lundgren and described the film "dull in concept and
execution".[111]

Later in 2009, Lundgren directed and starred in the hit-man thriller _Icarus_
(retitled in the US and the UK as _The Killing Machine_ ).[112] He plays a
businessman named Edward Genn, working for an investment company, who has a
shady past as a KGB special agent known as "Icarus". He tries to escape from
his past life, but his identity is discovered and he is hunted down, placing
the lives of his wife and daughter and himself in jeopardy. Retitled in the US
and the UK as _The Killing Machine_ , it opened theatrically in Los Angeles on
10 September 2010, for an exclusive one-week engagement at Laemmele's Sunset 5
Theater in West Hollywood.

In 2010, Lundgren made a guest star appearance on the TV series _Chuck_ in the
fourth-season premiere episode, "Chuck Versus the Anniversary", as Russian spy
Marco, with references to _Rocky IV'_s Ivan Drago.[33] He then played a drug-
addled assassin alongside Sylvester Stallone, Jason Statham, Jet Li, Randy
Couture, Steve Austin, Terry Crews, Mickey Rourke, Bruce Willis, and Arnold
Schwarzenegger in the action film _The Expendables_ , which opened in theatres
on 13 August 2010. The film is about a group of elite mercenaries, tasked with
a mission to overthrow a Latin American dictator. It was described by Lundgren
as "an old-school, kick-ass action movie where people are fighting with knives
and shooting at each other."[113] This was his first American theatrical
release film since 1995's _Johnny Mnemonic_ , (although The Inquiry (The Final
Inquiry) and _Missionary Man_ both played theatrically for one week in Dallas
and San Diego in December 2007). Film production began on 3 March 2009, with a
budget of $82 million.[114] Filming commenced 25 days later in Rio de Janeiro
and other locations in Brazil, and later in Louisiana. The film received mixed
reviews from critics but was very successful commercially, opening at number
one at the box office in the United States, the United Kingdom,[115]
China[116] and India.[117]

Lundgren was one of three hosts for the 2010 Melodifestivalen, where the
Swedish contribution to the Eurovision Song Contest is selected. In the first
installation on 6 February, Lundgren co-hosted the competition together with
comedian Christine Meltzer and performer Måns Zelmerlöw. Lundgren's appearance
was hailed by critics and audience, particularly his rendition of Elvis
Presley's "A Little Less Conversation".[118][119][120][121][122]

Lundgren played the lead role in Uwe Boll's _In the Name of the King 2: Two
Worlds_ , and had supporting roles in Jonas Åkerlund's _Small Apartments_ and
a thriller called _Stash House_. Principal photography for _Universal Soldier:
Day of Reckoning_ began on 9 May 2011 in Louisiana, and filming wrapped on
_One in the Chamber_ (co-starring Cuba Gooding, Jr.) around the same
time.[123] _The Expendables 2_ entered principal photography in late
September/early October 2011, with Lundgren reprising his role as Gunner
Jensen. Filming wrapped in January 2012, and it was released by Lionsgate on
17 August later that year.[107]

In 2013, Lundgren starred alongside Steve Austin in _The Package_. Directed by
Jesse Johnson, principal photography wrapped in March 2012, and the film was
released on 9 February 2013. For a direct-to-DVD film, _The Package_ was not a
financial success. In its first week of release, the film debuted at no. 81;
grossing $1,469 at the domestic box office.[124] He starred in a number of
other films later that year, including _Legendary: Tomb of the Dragon_ ,
_Battle of the Damned_ , _Ambushed_ , and _Blood of Redemption_.

In 2014, Lundgren co-starred opposite Cung Le in the action film _Puncture
Wounds_ , and reprised his role as Gunner Jensen for a third time in _The
Expendables 3_. He then wrote, produced, and starred alongside Jaa and Ron
Perlman in _Skin Trade_ , an action thriller about human
trafficking.[125][126] Principal photography started on 2 February 2014 in
Thailand, and wrapped in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; April the same
year.[127][128] The film received a limited theatrical release, followed by a
Blu-ray and DVD release on 25 August 2015.[129][130] In February, he filmed a
cameo for the Coen brothers' 2016 comedy film _Hail, Caesar!_ , portraying a
Soviet submarine captain.[131]

On 21 January 2015, Lundgren started filming straight-to-video film _Shark
Lake_ on the Mississippi Gulf Coast.[132] This was followed by a further six
weeks of filming in the "Reno-Tahoe area".[133] In the film, he portrays Clint
Gray, a black-market dealer of exotic species responsible for releasing a
dangerous shark into Lake Tahoe.[134] Directed by Jerry Dugan, the film's
budget was $2 million.[133] On 23 May, straight-to-video film _War Pigs_
premiered at the GI Film Festival. In the film, Lundgren co-starred (alongside
Luke Goss) as Captain Hans Picault, a French Legionnaire who trains a U.S.
Army Infantry group to go behind enemy lines and exterminate the Nazis. In
August 2015, he started filming _Kindergarten Cop 2_ in Ontario, Canada, a
straight-to-video sequel to the 1990 comedy film that starred Arnold
Schwarzenegger.[135][136] He portrays Agent Reed, a law enforcement officer
who must go undercover as a kindergarten teacher, in order to recover a
missing flash drive from the Federal Witness Protection Program.[137]
Throughout that year, he starred in a number of other straight-to-video films,
including the crime thriller _The Good, the Bad and the Dead_[138] and the
prison film _Riot_.[139] He is due to star in the Mike Mendez horror thriller
_Don't Kill It_ , portraying demon hunter Jebediah Woodley;[140] and in R
Ellis Frazier's thriller film _Larceny_ , portraying Jack: a "former
operative-turned-professional thief".[141] He starred in the music video of
Imagine Dragon's Believer, which was released on 7 March 2017.[142] In August
2017, he portrayed the future version of Gil Shepard in the Syfy film
_Sharknado 5: Global Swarming_.

_Black Water_ (2018) is an action thriller film directed by Pasha Patriki. It
co-stars and Jean-Claude Van Damme in the fifth collaboration between both
actors [143] as well as the first time they appear together as on-screen
allies.[144]

In 2018, Lundgren reprised his role of Ivan Drago from _Rocky IV_ in _Creed
II_ , the sequel to _Creed_.[145] He played an older, impoverished Drago in
the film, which also introduces the character's son, Viktor. This marked the
beginning of what New York Magazine has described as Lundgren's
"comeback."[146] Also that year, Lundgren co-starred in the DC Extended
Universe film _Aquaman_ , from director James Wan, as the underwater king
Nereus.

Although Lundgren has never competed as a professional bodybuilder, he has
been closely associated with bodybuilding and fitness since his role as Drago
in the mid-1980s. Bodybuilding.com said, "Looking like a man in his 30s rather
than his 50s, Lundgren is the poster boy of precise nutrition, supplementation
and exercise application that he has practiced for over 35 years."[147] In an
interview with them, he claimed to often train up to six days a week, usually
one-hour sessions completed in the morning, saying that "it's just one hour a
day, and then you can enjoy the other 23 hours".[148] Although he had begun
lifting weights as a teenager, he cites co-star Sylvester Stallone as the man
who got him into serious bodybuilding for a period in the 1980s after he
arrived in the U.S.[148] Stallone had a lasting influence on his fitness
regime and diet, ensuring that he ate a much higher percentage of protein and
split his food intake between five or six smaller meals a day.[147] Lundgren
has professed never to have been "super strong", saying that, "I'm too tall
and my arms are long. I think back then [ _Rocky IV_ ] I was working with
around 300 pounds on the bench and squat."[21]

In a January 2011 interview with _GQ_ he announced he is working on releasing
his own range of vitamins and supplements.[149] He wrote an autobiographical
fitness book, _Train Like an Action Hero: Be Fit Forever_ , published in
Sweden (by Bonnier Fakta) on 9 August 2011, offering tips he learned over the
years to work out in various situations (with a busy schedule and a lot of
traveling).[150] On 9 September 2014, Lundgren published _Dolph Lundgren:
Train Like an Action Hero: Be Fit Forever_ , a book which contains a detailed
account of his earlier life and troubles. He cites a better quality of life as
having inspired him to maintain his physical fitness.[151]

When in Los Angeles he trains at the Equinox Gym in Westwood and when at home
in Marbella, Spain, he trains at the Qi Sport Gym in Puerto Banús.[147][152]
Dolph does, however, also like to spar and practice his karate in the gym to
keep in top shape aside from weight lifting.[148] He cites dead lifting and
squats as the best exercises for muscle building.[152] Lundgren is not a heavy
drinker, but has professed on many occasions to being fond of tequila and
cocktails, citing his knowledge in chemical engineering as "making really good
drinks".[105]

Lundgren resides in Los Angeles, California. He speaks Swedish and English
fluently, as well as smaller amounts of French, German, Italian, Japanese, and
Spanish, but is not fluent in five languages as has often been
reported.[153][154]

He is an avid football fan. He supported Everton FC when he lived in Europe,
but developed more of an interest in international football tournaments (such
as the UEFA European Championship and the FIFA World Cup) after moving to Los
Angeles.[155]

During the 1980s, Lundgren had relationships with Jamaican singer Grace Jones
and American model Paula Barbieri.[17] In 1994, he married Anette Qviberg, a
jewellery designer and fashion stylist, in Marbella.[152] The couple decided
they liked Marbella so much that they rented accommodation there for years,
before eventually buying a family home there.[152] They have two daughters:
Ida Sigrid Lundgren and Greta Eveline Lundgren, both born in Stockholm.[33]
Lundgren and Qviberg cited the reason for their having lived away from
Hollywood as having been that of having wanted to give their children as
normal a childhood as possible.[6] His father died in 2000.

In early May 2009, Lundgren's Marbella home was reportedly broken into by
three masked burglars who tied up and threatened his wife, but fled when they
found a family photo and realized that the house was owned by Lundgren.[156]
Lundgren later stated he believed the intruders to be Eastern European and had
asked contacts in Bulgaria to investigate them, but to no avail.[157][158]
After the incident, Lundgren's elder daughter, Ida, suffered from PTSD. His
wife was the "most traumatized",[159] and as of 2011[update], they are
divorced.

Lundgren currently lives in Los Angeles, California. He broke up with his
girlfriend, Jenny Sandersson, in 2014 and it was said that they were secretly
engaged and married later.[160][161]

Denotes lead role

Denotes lead role

Denotes lead role

Denotes lead role

