A **dromon** (from Greek δρόμων, _dromōn_ , "runner") was a type of galley and
the most important warship of the Byzantine navy from the 5th to 12th
centuries AD, when they were succeeded by Italian-style galleys. It was
developed from the ancient liburnian, which was the mainstay of the Roman navy
during the Empire.[2]

Middle English _dromond_ and Old French _dromont_ are derived from the dromon,
and described any particularly large medieval ship.[3]

The appearance and evolution of medieval warships is a matter of debate and
conjecture: until recently, no remains of an oared warship from either ancient
or early medieval times had been found, and information had to be gathered by
analyzing literary evidence, crude artistic depictions and the remains of a
few merchant vessels (such as the 7th-century Pantano Longarini wreck from
Sicily, the 7th-century Yassi Ada ship and the 11th-century Serçe Limanı
wreck). Only in 2005–2006 did archaeological digs for the Marmaray project in
the location of the Harbor of Theodosius (modern Yenikapi) uncover the remains
of over 36 Byzantine ships from the 6th to 10th centuries, including four
light galleys of the _galea_ type.[4]

The accepted view is that the main developments which differentiated the early
dromons from the liburnians, and that henceforth characterized Mediterranean
galleys, were the adoption of a full deck ( _katastrōma_ ), the abandonment of
the rams on the bow in favor of an above-water spur, and the gradual
introduction of lateen sails.[5] The exact reasons for the abandonment of the
ram (Latin: _rostrum_ , Greek: ἔμβολος) are unclear. Depictions of upward-
pointing beaks in the 4th-century _Vatican Vergil_ manuscript may well
illustrate that the ram had already been replaced by a spur in late Roman
galleys.[6] One possibility is that the change occurred because of the gradual
evolution of the ancient shell-first mortise and tenon hull construction
method, against which rams had been designed, into the skeleton-first method,
which produced a stronger and more flexible hull, less susceptible to ram
attacks.[7] Certainly by the early 7th century, the ram's original function
had been forgotten, if we judge by Isidore of Seville's comments that they
were used to protect against collision with underwater rocks.[8] As for the
lateen sail, various authors have in the past suggested that it was introduced
into the Mediterranean by the Arabs, possibly with an ultimate origin in
India. However, the discovery of new depictions and literary references in
recent decades has led scholars to antedate the appearance of the lateen sail
in the Levant to the late Hellenistic or early Roman period.[9][10] Not only
the triangular, but also the quadrilateral version were known, used for
centuries (mostly on smaller craft) in parallel with square sails.[9][11]

Belisarius's fleet during the Vandalic War, as described by Procopius of
Caesarea, was apparently at least partly fitted with lateen sails, making it
probable that by that time the lateen had become the standard rig for the
dromon,[12] with the traditional square sail gradually falling from use in
medieval navigation.[11] These 6th-century dromons were single-banked
("monoreme") ships of probably 50 oars, arranged with 25 oars on each
side.[13] Again unlike Hellenistic vessels, which used an outrigger, these
extended directly from the hull.[14] In the later two-banked ("bireme")
dromons of the 9th and 10th centuries, the two oar banks ( _elasiai_ ) were
divided by the deck, with the first oar bank was situated below, whilst the
second oar bank was situated above deck; these rowers were expected to fight
alongside the ship's marines in boarding operations.[15] The Greek scholar
Christos Makrypoulias suggests an arrangement of 25 oarsmen beneath and 35 on
the deck on either side for a dromon of 120 rowers.[16] The overall length of
these ships was probably about 32 meters.[17] Although most contemporary
vessels had a single mast ( _histos_ or _katartion_ ), the larger bireme
dromons probably needed at least two masts in order to maneuver
effectively,[18] assuming that a single lateen sail for a ship this size would
have reached unmanageable dimensions.[19] The ship was steered by means of two
quarter rudders at the stern ( _prymnē_ ), which also housed a tent ( _skēnē_
) that covered the captain's berth ( _krab(b)at(t)os_ ).[20] The prow (
_prōra_ ) featured an elevated forecastle ( _pseudopation_ ), below which the
siphon for the discharge of Greek fire projected,[21] although secondary
siphons could also be carried amidships on either side.[22] A pavesade (
_kastellōma_ ), on which marines could hang their shields, ran around the
sides of the ship, providing protection to the deck crew.[23] Larger ships
also had wooden castles ( _xylokastra_ ) on either side between the masts,
similar to those attested for the Roman liburnians, providing archers with
elevated firing platforms.[24] The bow spur ( _peronion_ ) was intended to
ride over an enemy ship's oars, breaking them and rendering it helpless
against missile fire and boarding actions.[25]

The four _galeai_ ships uncovered in the Yenikapi excavations, dating to the
10th–11th centuries, are of uniform design and construction, suggesting a
centralized manufacturing process. They have a length of about 30 metres (98
ft), and are built of European Black Pine and Oriental plane.[26]

By the 10th century, there were three main classes of bireme warships of the
general dromon type, as detailed in the inventories for the expeditions sent
against the Emirate of Crete in 911 and 949: the _[chelandion] ousiakon_
([χελάνδιον] οὑσιακόν), so named because it was manned by an _ousia_ of 108
men; the _[chelandion] pamphylon_ ([χελάνδιον] πάμφυλον), crewed with up to
120–160 men, its name either implying an origin in the region of Pamphylia as
a transport ship or its crewing with "picked crews" (from πᾶν+φῦλον, "all
tribes"); and the _dromōn_ proper, crewed by two _ousiai_.[27] In Constantine
VII's _De Ceremoniis_ , the heavy _dromōn_ is said to have an even larger crew
of 230 rowers and 70 marines; the naval expert John H. Pryor considers them as
supernumerary crews being carried aboard, while Makrypoulias suggests that the
extra men correspond to a second rower on each of the upper-bank oars.[28] A
smaller, single-bank ship, the _monērēs_ (μονήρης, "single-banked") or _galea_
(γαλέα, from which the term "galley" derives), with ca. 60 men as crew, was
used for scouting missions but also in the wings of the battle line.[29]

Three-banked ("trireme") dromons are described in a 10th-century work
dedicated to the _parakoimōmenos_ Basil Lekapenos. However, this treatise,
which survives only in fragments, draws heavily upon references on the
appearance and construction of a classical Greek trireme, and must therefore
be used with care when trying to apply it to the warships of the middle
Byzantine period.[30][31] The existence of trireme vessels is, however,
attested in the Fatimid navy in the 11th and 12th centuries, and references
made by Leo VI to large Arab ships in the 10th century may also indicate
trireme galleys.[32]

For cargo transport, the Byzantines usually commandeered ordinary merchantmen
as transport ships ( _phortēgoi_ ) or supply ships ( _skeuophora_ ). These
appear to have been mostly sailing vessels, rather than oared.[33] The
Byzantines and Arabs also employed horse-transports ( _hippagōga_ ), which
were either sailing ships or galleys, the latter certainly modified to
accommodate the horses.[34] Given that the _chelandia_ appear originally to
have been oared horse-transports, this would imply differences in construction
between the _chelandion_ and the _dromōn_ proper, terms which otherwise are
often used indiscriminately in literary sources. While the _dromōn_ was
developed exclusively as a war galley, the _chelandion_ would have had to have
a special compartment amidships to accommodate a row of horses, increasing its
beam and hold depth.[35]

