**Dubbing** , **mixing** , or **re-recording** is a post-production process
used in filmmaking and video production in which additional or supplementary
recordings are "mixed" with original production sound to create the finished
soundtrack.

The process usually takes place on a dub stage. After sound editors edit and
prepare all the necessary tracks – dialogue, automated dialogue replacement
(ADR), effects, Foley, music – the dubbing mixers proceed to balance all of
the elements and record the finished soundtrack. Dubbing is sometimes confused
with ADR,[ _further explanation needed_ ] also known as "additional dialogue
replacement",[ _clarification needed_ ][1][2][3] "automated dialogue
recording" and "looping",[4][5] in which the original actors re-record and
synchronize audio segments.

Outside the film industry, the term "dubbing" commonly refers to the
replacement of the actor's voices with those of different performers speaking
another language, which is called "revoicing" in the film industry.[1]

In the past,[ _when?_ ] dubbing was practiced primarily in musicals when the
actor had an unsatisfactory singing voice.[ _citation needed_ ] Today, dubbing
enables the screening of audiovisual material to a mass audience in countries
where viewers do not speak the same language as the performers in the original
production.[ _citation needed_ ]

Films, videos, and sometimes video games are often dubbed into the local
language of a foreign market. In foreign distribution, dubbing is common in
theatrically released films, television films, television series, cartoons,
and anime.[6]

**Automated Dialog Replacement** ( **ADR** ) is the process of re-recording
dialogue by the original actor after the filming process to improve audio
quality or reflect dialogue changes (also known as "looping" or a "looping
session").[7][8] In India the process is simply known as "dubbing", while in
the UK, it is also called "post-synchronisation" or "post-sync". The insertion
of voice actor performances for animation, such as computer generated imagery
or animated cartoons, is often referred to as ADR although it generally does
not replace existing dialogue.

The ADR process may be used to:

In conventional film production, a production sound mixer records dialogue
during filming. During post-production, a supervising sound editor, or ADR
supervisor, reviews all of the dialogue in the film and decides which lines
must be re-recorded. ADR is recorded during an ADR session, which takes place
in a specialized sound studio. The actor, usually the original actor from the
set, views the scene with the original sound, then attempts to recreate the
performance. Over the course of multiple takes, the actor performs the lines
while watching the scene; the most suitable take becomes the final version.[9]
The ADR process does not always take place in a post-production studio. The
process may be recorded on location, with mobile equipment. ADR can also be
recorded without showing the actor the image they must match, but by having
them listen to the performance, since some actors[ _who?_ ] believe that
watching themselves act can degrade subsequent performances.

Sometimes, an actor other than the original actor is used during ADR. One
famous example is the _Star Wars_ character Darth Vader, portrayed by David
Prowse; in post-production, James Earl Jones dubbed the voice of Vader.[10]

Other examples include:

The tasks involved are performed by three different agents[ _clarification
needed_ ] in the dubbing process:

Sometimes the translator performs all five tasks. In other cases, the
translator just submits a rough translation and a dialogue writer does the
rest.

The dialogue writer’s role is to make the translation sound natural of the
target language, and to make the translation sound like a credible dialogue
instead of merely a translated text.[11]

Another task of dialogue writers is to check whether a translation matches an
on-screen character’s mouth movements or not, by reading aloud simultaneously
with the character. The dialogue writer often stays in the recording setting
with the actors or the voice talents, to ensure that the dialogue is being
spoken in the way that it was written to be, and to avoid any ambiguity in the
way the dialogue is to be read (focusing on emphasis, intonation,
pronunciation, articulation, pronouncing foreign words correctly, etc.). The
overall goal is to make sure the script creates the illusion of authenticity
of the spoken language.

An alternative method to dubbing, called "rythmo band" (or "lip-sync band"),
has historically been used in Canada and France.[ _citation needed_ ] It
provides a more precise guide[ _further explanation needed_ ] for the actors,
directors, and technicians, and can be used to complement the traditional ADR
method. The "band" is actually a clear 35 mm film leader on which the dialogue
is hand-written in India ink, together with numerous additional indications
for the actor—including laughs, cries, length of syllables, mouth sounds,
breaths, and mouth openings and closings. The rythmo band is projected in the
studio and scrolls in perfect synchronization with the picture.[ _citation
needed_ ]

Studio time is used more efficiently, since with the aid of scrolling text,
picture, and audio cues, actors can read more lines per hour than with ADR
alone (only picture and audio). With ADR, actors can average 10–12 lines per
hour, while rythmo band can facilitate the reading of 35-50 lines per
hour.[12]

However, the preparation of a rythmo band is a time-consuming process
involving a series of specialists organized in a production line. This has
prevented the technique from being more widely adopted, but software
emulations of rythmo band technology overcome the disadvantages of the
traditional rythmo band process and significantly reduce the time needed to
prepare a dubbing session.[ _citation needed_ ]

Dub localization, also often simply referred to as localization, is the
practice of voice-over translation that alters a film or television series
from one region of the world to the local language of another.

The new voice track is usually spoken by a voice actor. In many countries,
actors who regularly perform this duty remain little-known, with the exception
of particular circles (such as anime fandom) or when their voices have become
synonymous with roles or actors whose voices they usually dub. In the United
States, many of these voice artists may employ pseudonyms or go uncredited due
to Screen Actors Guild regulations or the desire to dissociate themselves from
the role.[ _citation needed_ ]

Dub localization is a contentious issue in cinephilia amongst aficionados of
foreign filmmaking and television programs, particularly anime fans. While
some localization is virtually inevitable in translation, the controversy
surrounding how much localization is "too much" is often discussed in such
communities, especially when the final dub product is significantly different
from the original. Some fans frown on any extensive localization, while others
expect it, and to varying degrees, appreciate it.

In North-West Europe (the UK, Republic of Ireland, the Netherlands, the Dutch-
speaking part of Belgium, the Nordic countries and the Baltic states),
Portugal and Balkan countries, generally only movies and TV shows intended for
children are dubbed, while TV shows and movies for older audiences are
subtitled (although animated productions have a tradition of being dubbed).
For movies in cinemas with clear target audiences (both below and above 10–11
years of age), both a dubbed and a subtitled version are usually available.

In the United Kingdom, the vast majority of foreign language films are
subtitled, although mostly animated films and TV programmes are dubbed in
English. These usually originate from North America, as opposed to being
dubbed locally. There have, however, been notable examples of films and TV
programmes successfully dubbed in the UK, such as the Japanese _Monkey_ and
French _Magic Roundabout_ series. When airing films on television, channels in
the UK often choose subtitling over dubbing, even if a dubbing in English
exists. It is also a fairly common practice for animation aimed at preschool
children to be re-dubbed with British voice actors replacing the original
voices, such as Spin Master Entertainment's Paw Patrol series, although this
is not done with shows aimed at older audiences.

Some animated films and TV programmes are also dubbed into Welsh and Scottish
Gaelic.

Hinterland displays a not so common example of a bilingual production. Each
scene is filmed twice, in the English and Welsh languages, apart from a few
scenes where Welsh with subtitles is used for the English version.[13]

Ireland usually receives the same film versions as the UK. However some films
have been dubbed into Irish by TG4, including the _Harry Potter_ film
series.[14]

In Romania, virtually all programmes intended for children are dubbed in
Romanian, including cartoons, live-action movies and TV series on Disney
Channel, Cartoon Network, Minimax, and Nickelodeon, as well as those shown on
general television networks, children-focused series (such as _Power Rangers_
, _Goosebumps_ , _The New Addams Family_ , _The Planet's Funniest Animals_ )
or movies screened on children's television. Animated movies are shown in
theaters with Romanian dubbing. However, those cinemas with more screening
rooms usually also provide the original subtitled version. Such was the case
for movies like _Babe_ , _Atlantis: The Lost Empire_ , _Finding Nemo_ , _Cars_
, _Shrek the Third_ , _Ratatouille_ , _Kung Fu Panda_ and _WALL-E_. Other
foreign TV shows and movies are shown in the original language with Romanian
subtitles. Subtitles are usually preferred in the Romanian market. According
to "Special Eurobarometer 243" (graph QA11.8) of the European Commission
(research carried out in November and December 2005), 62% of Romanians prefer
to watch foreign films and programmes with subtitles (rather than dubbed), 22%
prefer dubbing, and 16% declined to answer.[15] This is led by the assumption
that watching movies in their original versions is very useful for learning
foreign languages. However, according to the same Eurobarometer, virtually no
Romanian found this method—watching movies in their original version—to be the
most efficient way to learn foreign languages, compared to 53 percent who
preferred language lessons at school.[15]

In Romania, foreign language television programs and films are generally
subtitled rather than dubbed.[16] This includes programs in non-Western
languages, such as Turkish, Korean or Hindi.[17]

Serbian language dubs are made mainly for Serbia, but they broadcast in
Montenegro and Bosnia & Herzegovina, too. Children's animated and some live-
action movies and TV series are dubbed into Serbian, while live-action films
and TV series for adults are always airing subtitled, because in this region
people prefer subtitling for live-action formats. Turkish soap opera _Lale
Devri_ started airing dubbed in 2011, on RTV Pink, but because of bad
reception, dub failed and rest of TV series was aired subtitled. _Married...
with Children_ was dubbed, too.

The dubbing of cartoon series in former Yugoslavia during the 1980s had a
twist of its own: famous Serbian actors, such as Nikola Simić, Mića Tatić,
Nada Blam and others provided the voices for characters of Disney, Warner
Bros., MGM and other companies, frequently using region-specific phrases and
sentences and, thus, adding a dose of local humor to the translation of the
original lines. These phrases became immensely popular and are still being
used for tongue-in-cheek comments in specific situations. These dubs are today
considered cult dubs. The only dub made after 1980s and 1990s ones that's
considered cult is _SpongeBob SquarePants_ dub, made by B92 in period
2002-2017, because of a great popularity and memorable translation with local
humor phrases, such as 1980s dubs translation.

Some Serbian dubs are also broadcast in North Macedonia, while cult dubs made
during Yugoslavia were aired all over the country (today's Croatia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro, Slovenia, North Macedonia and Serbia).

In Croatia, foreign films and TV series are always subtitled, while most
children's programs and animated movies are dubbed into Croatian. The practice
of dubbing began in the 1980s in some animated shows and continued in 90's,
00's and forward in other shows and films, the latter ones being released in
home media. Recently, more efforts have been made to introduce dubbing, but
public reception has been poor in some exceptions. Regardless of language,
Croatian audiences prefer subtitling to dubbing, however it is still popular
in animated films. Some previously popular shows (such as _Sailor Moon_ ) lost
their appeal completely after the practice of dubbing began, and the dubbing
was eventually removed from the programs, even though most animated shows
shown on television and some on home media have been well received by people
watching them with own dub. This situation is similar with theater movies,
with only those intended for children being dubbed (such as _Finding Nemo_ and
_Shark Tale_ ), but nowadays are shown in dubbed versions. Also, there has
been an effort to impose dubbing by Nova TV, with _La Fea Más Bella_
translated as _Ružna ljepotica_ (literally, "The Ugly Beauty"), a Mexican
telenovela, but it failed. Some of Croatian dubbing is also broadcast in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.

In Slovenia, all foreign films and television programs are subtitled with the
exception of children's movies and TV shows (both animated or live-action).
While dubbed versions are always shown in cinemas and later on TV channels,
cinemas will sometimes play subtitled versions of children's movies as well.[
_citation needed_ ]

North Macedonia dubbed many cartoons in Macedonian, but they also air some
Serbian dubs. Children's programs are airing dubbed (in Macedonian or
Serbian), while every other program is subtitled (in Macedonian). They use
Serbian dubs for Disney movies, because there are no Macedonian Disney dubs.

Bosnia and Herzegovina usually uses Serbian and Croatian dubs, but they have
dubbed some cartoons in Bosnian by themselves, for example _My Little Pony:
Friendship is Magic_. Children's programs (both animated and live-action) are
airing dubbed (in Serbian, Croatian or Bosnian), while every other program is
subtitled (in Bosnian).

In the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium (Flanders), movies and TV series are
shown in their original language with subtitles, with the exception of most
movies made for a young audience. In the latter case, sometimes separate
versions are recorded in the Netherlands and in Flanders (for instance,
several Walt Disney films and _Harry Potter_ films). These dubbed versions
only differ from each other in their use of different voice actors and
different pronunciation, while the text is almost the same.

In the French-speaking part of Belgium (Wallonia), the range of French-dubbed
versions is approximately as wide as the German range, where nearly all movies
and TV series are dubbed.

In Portugal, dubbing was banned under a 1948 law as a way of protecting the
domestic film industry and reduce the access to culture as most of the
population was illiterate.[18] Until 1994, animated movies, as well as other
TV series for children shown in Portugal, have imported Brazilian Portuguese
dubs due to the lack of interest from Portuguese companies in the dubbing
industry. This lack of interest was justified, since there were already
quality dubbed copies of shows and movies in Portuguese made by Brazilians.
_The Lion King_ was the first feature film to be dubbed in European Portuguese
rather than strictly Brazilian Portuguese. Currently, all movies for children
are dubbed in European Portuguese. Subtitles are preferred in Portugal,[19]
used in every foreign-language documentary, TV series and film. The exception
to this preference is when children are the target audience.

While on TV, children's shows and movies are always dubbed, in cinemas, films
with a clear juvenile target can be found in two versions, one dubbed
(identified by the letters V.P. for _versão portuguesa_ \- "Portuguese
version") and another subtitled version (V.O. for _versão original_ \-
"original version"). This duality applies only to juvenile films. Others use
subtitles only. While the quality of these dubs is recognized (some have
already received international recognition and prizes), original versions with
subtitles are usually preferred by the adults ( _Bee Movie_ , for example).
Dubbing cartoons aimed at adults (such as _The Simpsons_ or _South Park_ ) is
less common. When _The Simpsons Movie_ debuted in Portugal, most cinemas
showed both versions (V.O. and V.P.), but in some small cities, cinemas
decided to offer only the Portuguese version, a decision that led to public
protest. Presently, live action series and movies are always shown in their
original language format with Portuguese subtitles. Television programs for
young children (such as _Power Rangers_ , _Goosebumps_ , _Big Bad Beetleborgs_
, etc.) are dubbed into European Portuguese. Some video games aimed at adults
(such as God of War III, Halo 3, Assassin's Creed III and inFamous 2) are
dubbed in European Portuguese, although there they provide an option to select
the original language.

In the Netherlands, for the most part, Dutch versions are only made for
children's and family films. Animated movies are shown in theaters with Dutch
dubbing, but usually those cinemas with more screening rooms also provide the
original subtitled version, such as movies like _Finding Nemo_ , _Shrek the
Third_ and _WALL-E_.

In Greece, most cartoon films have dubs. Usually when a movie has a Greek dub
the dub is shown in cinemas but subtitled versions are shown as well. Foreign
TV shows for adults are shown in their original versions with subtitles, most
cartoons, for example, _The Flintstones_ and _The Jetsons_ were always dubbed,
while _Family Guy_ and _American Dad!_ are always subtitled and contain the
original English dialogue, since they are mostly for adults rather than
children, (even though the movie _Space Jam_ was subtitled instead of being
dubbed, since also this is suitable for children). Also some Japanese anime
series are dubbed in Greek (such as Pokémon, Pichi Pichi Pitch, Sailor Moon
etc.) The only television programs dubbed in Greek includes Mexican TV series
(like _Rubí_ and _La usurpadora_ ) and teen series (like _Hannah Montana_ and
_The Suite Life of Zack& Cody_). However, when Skai TV was re-launched in
April 2006, the network opted for dubbing almost all foreign shows in Greek,
unlike other Greek channels which had always broadcast most of the programs in
their original language with subtitles.

In the Nordic countries, dubbing is used only in animated features and other
films for younger audiences. Some cinemas in the major cities may also screen
the original version, usually as the last showing of the day, or in a smaller
auditorium in a multiplex.

In television programs with off-screen narration, both the original audio and
on-screen voices are usually subtitled in their native languages.

The Nordic countries are often treated as a common market issuing DVD and Blu-
ray releases with original audio and user choosable subtitle options in
Danish, Finnish, Norwegian and Swedish. The covers often have text in all four
languages as well, but are sometimes unique for each country. Some releases
may include other European language audio and/or subtitles (i.e. German,
Greek, Hungarian or Italian). Children's films typically have Nordic audio
tracks in all four languages, as well as original audio in most cases.

In Finland, the dubbed version from Sweden may also be available at certain
cinemas for children of the 5% Swedish-speaking minority, but only in cities
or towns with a significant percentage of Swedish speakers. Most DVD and Blu-
ray releases usually only have the original audio, except for children's
films, which have both Finnish and Swedish language tracks, in addition to the
original audio and subtitles in both languages.

In Iceland, the dubbed version of film and TV is usually Danish with some
translated into Icelandic. LazyTown, an Icelandic TV show originally broadcast
in English, was dubbed into Icelandic, amongst thirty-two other languages, and
it remains the TV show to have been dubbed into the most languages.

In movie theaters, films for adult audiences have both Finnish and Swedish
subtitles, the Finnish printed in basic font and the Swedish printed below the
Finnish in a cursive font. In the early ages of television, foreign TV shows
and movies were voiced by narrator in Finland. Later, subtitles became a
practice on Finnish television. Dubbing of films other than children's films
is unpopular in Finland, as in many other countries. A good example is _The
Simpsons Movie_. While the original version was well-received, the Finnish-
dubbed version received poor reviews, with some critics even calling it a
disaster.[ _citation needed_ ] On the other hand, many dubs of Disney animated
features have been well-received, both critically and by the public.

In Latvia and Lithuania, only children's movies get dubbed in the cinema,
while many movies use voice-over. In recent years however, many cartoons have
been dubbed into Latvian and Lithuanian for TV. But some other kids shows,
like _SpongeBob SquarePants_ , use the voice-over.

In Estonia in cinemas, only children's animated films are dubbed and live-
action films are shown in the original English and Russian languages with
subtitles at cinemas. Subtitles are usually presented in both Estonian and
Russian languages. Cartoons and animated series voiced by dubbing or voiceover
and live-action films and television series only with Estonian subtitles also
but with English and Russian Dub Languages. Animated films are commonly shown
in both the originals and Russian languages and dubbed into Estonian (or
Russian in many cinemas). Most Estonian-language television channels use
subtitles English and Russian Audio for foreign-language films and TV
channels. However, Russian language channels tend to use dubbing more often,
especially for Russian channels broadcast from Russia (as opposed to Russian
channels broadcast from Estonia).

In the Albanian, Turkish, French, Italian, Spanish, German, Czech, Slovak,
Hungarian, Polish, Russian and Ukrainian language-speaking markets of Europe,
almost all foreign films and television shows are dubbed (the exception being
the majority of theatrical releases of adult-audience movies in the Czech
Republic, Slovakia, Poland and Turkey and high-profile videos in Russia).
There are few opportunities to watch foreign movies in their original
versions. In Spain, Italy, Germany and Austria, even in the largest cities,
there are few cinemas that screen original versions with subtitles, or without
any translation. However, digital pay-TV programming is often available in the
original language, including the latest movies. Prior to the rise of DVDs,
which in these countries are mostly issued with multi-language audio tracks,
original-language films (those in languages other than the country's official
language) were rare, whether in theaters, on TV, or on home video, and
subtitled versions were considered a product for small niche markets such as
intellectual or art films.

The first movie dubbed in Albanian language was _The Great Warrior Skanderbeg_
in 1954 and since then, there have been thousands of popular titles dubbed in
Albanian by different dubbing studios. All animated movies and children's
programs are dubbed into Albanian language, many live-action movies as well.
TV series nevertheless are usually not dubbed, they are subtitled except for a
few Mexican, Brazilian and Turkish soap operas, like: _Por Ti_ , _Celebridade_
, _A Casa das Sete Mulheres_ , _Paramparça_ , etc. As for documentaries,
Albania usually uses voice-over.

Voice actors that have dubbed for celebrities in Albanian language can be
enlisted here.

In France, movies and TV series are, except purely arthouse films, usually
released in the dubbed French language version. The original language version
of the film with French subtitles is released in designated theaters which
show only subtitled versions or both versions are shown at different times or
split screenings between both versions. However, dubbing is the norm and
subtitling is only for niche audience and movies with subtitles are usually
very small arthouse films with very limited commercial prospects for pay and
free TV airings and also home entertainment (VOD, DVD). Dubbing in the French
Language is thus absolutely essential for any sale to be made.

Since the digitalization of even now the over-the-air television broadcaster,
both versions are however offered to the customer simultaneously. By default,
foreign films and TV programmes shown on television are dubbed into French on
a channel's main audio feed. However, with the advent of digital television,
viewers can access the original language feed for some programmes, as well as
matching subtitles. Most movies are released nationwide in dubbed version and
subtitled versions where available with the exception of very limited often
micro-budget arthouse productions that do stem come from the "hollywood movie
production" machine which are exclusively arthouse films and not dubbed at the
time of their theatrical release. Theaters showing these kind of movies or
also showing commercial films in the original language version with French
subtitles are very rare outside of the big cities and most of them are located
in Paris which has the most "cinephile" cinemas in France. Often these "niche"
films are only released in Paris region.

A theater showing subtitled versions of original language movies are typically
well known for this and will advertise this also on the poster advising
moviegoers that the film is shown in an original language version (usually
abbreviated VO [ _version originale_ ] or VOST [ _version originale sous-
titrée_ ]), as opposed to VF [ _version française_ ], the latter then becoming
what is known and used also in the neighboring countries like Belgium or
Switzerland, as the "FRENCH LANGUAGE VERSION" of the film.)

Because the alterations made to the original film are so profound, making it
no longer viewable or understandable for audiences that speak the language the
film was originally shot in, the final dubbed version is called the "French
language version", as opposed to the use of subtitles which leave the film in
its original state. The choice to dub or not at the time of theatrical release
is a decision made by the distributor releasing the film based upon their
recoupment strategy for the film and their prognosis of the commercial
prospects. Given the fact that a dub is needed for home entertainment and TV
sales, only very small arthouse films are never dubbed. Only a very small
percentage (according to the official institute CNC in France only 16.4% of
all ticket-sales were for movies watched in the original language version with
subtitles) and this is counting Blockbusters and others shown in their
original language version with subtitles and the small number of films that
are never dubbed. Voice actors that have dubbed for celebrities in the
European French language can be viewed here.

In Italy, dubbing is systematic, with a tradition going back to the 1930s in
Rome, Milan, Florence and Turin. In Mussolini's fascist Italy, release of
movies in foreign languages was banned for political reasons. Rome is the
principal base of the dubbing industry, where major productions such as
movies, drama, documentaries and some cartoons are dubbed. However, dubbing in
Milan is mostly of cartoons and some minor productions. Practically every
foreign film (mostly American ones) of every genre, for children or adults, as
well as TV shows, are dubbed into Italian. In big cities, original-version
movies can also be seen in some theaters but it is not so common. Subtitles
may be available on late-night programs on mainstream TV channels, and on pay-
TV all movies are available in the original language with Italian subtitles,
many shows featuring their original soundtracks.

Early in their careers, actors such as Alberto Sordi or Nino Manfredi worked
extensively as dubbing actors. At one point, common practice in Italian cinema
was to shoot scenes MOS (motor only sync or motor only shot) and dub the
dialogue in post-production. A notable example of this practice is _The Good,
the Bad, and the Ugly_ , in which all actors had to dub in their own voices.

Video games are generally either dubbed into Italian (for instance Assassin's
Creed saga, Halo or Harry Potter series etc.) or released with original-
speaking tracks but with all the texts translated into Italian language.

A list of the voice actors that have dubbed for celebrities in Italian can be
enlisted here.

In Spain, practically all foreign television programs are shown dubbed in
European Spanish, as are most films. Some dubbing actors have achieved
popularity for their voices, such as Constantino Romero (who dubs Clint
Eastwood, Darth Vader and Arnold Schwarzenegger's Terminator, among others)
and Óscar Muñoz (the official European Spanish dub-over voice artist for
Elijah Wood and Hayden Christensen). Currently, with the spread of digital
terrestrial television, viewers can choose between the original and the dubbed
soundtracks for most movies and television.

In some communities such as Catalonia, Galicia and Basque Country, some
foreign programs are also dubbed into their own languages, different from
European Spanish. Films from the Spanish-speaking America shown in these
communities are shown in their original language, while strong regional
accents (from the Spanish-speaking America or from Spain) may be subtitled in
news and documentaries.

The Germanophone dubbing market is the largest in Europe. Germany has the most
foreign-movie-dubbing studios per capita and per given area in the world and
according to the German newspaper Die Welt 52% of all voice actors currently
work in the German dubbing industry. In Germany, Austria, and the German-
speaking part of Switzerland, practically all films, shows, television series
and foreign soap operas are shown in dubbed versions created for the German
market. However, in some of Switzerland's towns and cities (particularly along
the language-borders), subtitled versions are common. Dubbing films is a
traditional and common practice in German-speaking Europe, since subtitles are
not accepted and used as much as in other European countries. According to a
European study, Austria is the country with the highest rejection rate (more
than 70 percent) of subtitles, followed by Italy, Spain and Germany.[
_citation needed_ ] In German-speaking markets, computer and video games
feature German text menus and are dubbed into the German language if speaking
parts exist.

In recent years, Swiss and Austrian television stations have been showing
increasing numbers of movies, series and TV-programmes in "dual sound," which
means the viewer can choose between the original language (e.g. English) and
the language of the channel (German, French or Italian, according to the
location).

Although German-speaking voice actors play only a secondary role, they are
still notable for providing familiar voices to well-known actors. Famous
foreign actors are known and recognized for their German voice, and the German
audience is used to them, so dubbing is also a matter of authenticity.
However, in larger cities, there are theaters where movies can be seen in
their original versions, as English has become somewhat more popular among
young educated viewers. On German mainstream television, films are never
broadcast with subtitles, but pay-per-view programming is often available in
the original language. Subtitled niche and art films are sometimes aired on
smaller networks.

German-dubbed versions sometimes diverge greatly from the original, especially
in adding humorous elements to the original. In extreme cases, such as _The
Persuaders!_ , the dubbed version was more successful than the English
original. Often, translation adds sexually explicit gags the U.S. versions
might not be allowed to use. For example, in _Bewitched_ , the translators
changed _"TheDo Not Disturb sign will hang on the door tonight"_ to _"The only
hanging thing tonight will be the Do Not Disturb sign"_.

Some movies dubbed in Austria diverge from the German Standard version in
addressing other people but only when the movies are dubbed into certain
Austrian dialect versions. (Mr. and Mrs. are translated into Herr and Frau
which is usually not translated in order to be in lip-sync). Sometimes even
English pronounced first names are translated and are pronounced into the
correct German equivalent (English name "Bert" became Southern German
pronounced name "Bertl" which is an abbreviation for any name either beginning
or even ending with "bert", e.g. "Berthold" or "Albert".)

Some movies dubbed before reunification exist in different versions for the
east and the west. They use different translations, and often differ in the
style of dubbing.

German dubbing voice artists of actors are enlisted here.

In Slovakia, home media market, Czech dubbed versions are widely used, with
only children's films and some few exceptions (for example Independence Day)
that have been dubbed for cinema being released with Slovak dubbing. Czech
dubbing was also extensively used in the broadcast of Slovak television
channels, but since 2008 Slovak language laws require any newer shows
(understood as the first television broadcast in Slovakia) to be provided with
Slovak localization (dubbing or subtitles); since then, television broadcasts
of films, TV series and cartoons have been dubbed into Slovak.

In Hungary, dubbing is almost universally common. Almost every foreign movie
or TV show released in Hungary is dubbed into Hungarian.[20] The history of
dubbing dates back to the 1950s, when the country was still under communist
rule.[21] One of the most iconic Hungarian dubs was of the American cartoon
_The Flintstones_ , with a local translation by József Romhányi.[22] The
Internetes Szinkron Adatbázis (ISzDB) is the largest Hungarian database for
film dubs, with information for many live action and animated films.[23] On
page 59 of the Eurobarometer, 84% of Hungarians said that they prefer dubbing
over subtitles.[15]

In the socialist era, every film was dubbed with professional and mostly
popular actors. Care was taken to make sure the same voice actor would lend
his voice to the same original actor. In the early 1990s, as cinemas tried to
keep up with showing newly released films, subtitling became dominant in the
cinema. This, in turn, forced TV channels to make their own cheap versions of
dubbed soundtracks for the movies they presented, resulting in a constant
degrading of dubbing quality. Once this became customary, cinema distributors
resumed the habit of dubbing for popular productions, presenting them in a
below-average quality. However, every feature is presented with the original
soundtrack in at least one cinema in large towns and cities.

However, in Hungary, most documentary films and series (for example, those on
Discovery Channel, National Geographic Channel) are made with voiceovers. Some
old movies and series, or ones that provide non-translatable jokes and
conversations (for example, the _Mr. Bean_ television series), are shown only
with subtitles.

There is a more recent problem arising from dubbing included on DVD releases.
Many generations have grown up with an original (and, by current technological
standards, outdated) soundtrack, which is either technologically (mono or bad
quality stereo sound) or legally (expired soundtrack license) unsuitable for a
DVD release. Many original features are released on DVD with a new soundtrack,
which in some cases proves to be extremely unpopular, thus forcing DVD
producers to include the original soundtrack. In some rare cases, the
Hungarian soundtrack is left out altogether. This happens notably with Warner
Home Video Hungary, which ignored the existence of Hungarian soundtracks
completely, as they did not want to pay the licenses for the soundtracks to be
included on their new DVD releases, which appear with improved picture
quality, but very poor subtitling.

In Poland, cinema releases for general audiences are almost exclusively
subtitled, with the exception of children's movies, and television screenings
of movies, as well as made-for-TV shows. These are usually shown with voice-
over, where a voice talent reads a translation over the original soundtrack.
This method, called "juxtareading," is similar to the so-called Gavrilov
translation in Russia, with one difference—all dialogues are voiced by one
off-screen reader (Polish: _lektor_ ), preferably with a deep and neutral
voice which does not interfere with the pitch of voice of the original
speakers in the background. To some extent, it resembles live translation.
Certain highly qualified voice talents are traditionally assigned to
particular kinds of production, such as action or drama. Standard dubbing is
not widely popular with most audiences, with the exception of cartoons and
children's shows, which are dubbed also for TV releases.

It is claimed that, until around 1951, there were no revoiced foreign movies
available in Poland. Instead, they were exclusively subtitled in Polish.[24]

Poland's dubbing traditions began between the two world wars. In 1931, among
the first movies dubbed into Polish were _Dangerous Curves_ (1929), _The Dance
of Life_ (1929), _Paramount on Parade_ (1930), and _Darling of the Gods_
(1930). In 1949, the first dubbing studio opened in Łódź. The first film
dubbed that year was _Russkiy Vopros_ (filmed 1948).

Polish dubbing in the first post-war years suffered from poor synchronization.
Polish dialogues were not always audible and the cinema equipment of that time
often made films sound less clear than they were. In the 1950s, Polish
publicists discussed the quality of Polish versions of foreign movies.

The number of dubbed movies and the quality improved. Polish dubbing had a
golden age between the 1960s and the 1980s. Approximately a third of foreign
movies screened in cinemas were dubbed. The "Polish dubbing school" was known
for its high quality. In that time, Poland had some of the best dubbing in the
world. The person who initiated high-quality dubbing versions was director
Zofia Dybowska-Aleksandrowicz. In that time, dubbing in Poland was very
popular. Polish television dubbed popular films and TV series such as _Rich
Man, Poor Man_ ; _Fawlty Towers_ , _Forsyte Saga_ , _Elizabeth R_ , _I,
Claudius_ , _I'll Take Manhattan_ , and _Peter the Great_.

In the 1980s, due to budget cuts, state-run TV saved on tapes by voicing films
over live during transmission.

Overall, during 1948-1998, almost 1,000 films were dubbed in Polish. In the
1990s, dubbing films and TV series continued, although often also for one
emission only.

In 1995, Canal+ was launched in Poland. In its first years, it dubbed 30% of
its schedule dubbing popular films and TV series, one of the best-known and
popular dubbings was that of _Friends_ , but this proved unsuccessful.[25] It
stopped dubbing films in 1999, although many people supported the idea of
dubbing and bought the access only for dubbing versions of foreign
productions. In the 1990s, dubbing was done by the television channel known as
Wizja Jeden. They mainly dubbed BBC productions such as _The League of
Gentlemen_ , _Absolutely Fabulous_ and _Men Behaving Badly_. Wizja Jeden was
closed in 2001. In the same year, TVP stopped dubbing the TV series _Frasier_
, although that dubbing was very popular.

Currently, dubbing of films and TV series for teenagers is made by Nickelodeon
and Disney Channel. One of the major breakthroughs in dubbing was the Polish
release of _Shrek_ , which contained many references to local culture and
Polish humour. Since then, people seem to have grown to like dubbed versions
more, and pay more attention to the dubbing actors.[ _citation needed_ ]
However, this seems to be the case only with animated films, as live-action
dubbing is still considered a bad practice. In the case of DVD releases, most
discs contain both the original soundtrack and subtitles, and either voice
over or dubbed Polish track. The dubbed version is, in most cases, the one
from the theater release, while voice-over is provided for movies that were
only subtitled in theaters.

Since theatrical release of _The Avengers_ in May 2012, Walt Disney Company
Polska dubs all films for cinema releases. Also in 2012, United International
Pictures Polska dubbed _The Amazing Spider-Man_ , while Forum Film Polska –
former distributor of Disney's films – decided to dub _The Hobbit: An
Unexpected Journey_ , along with its two sequels. However, when a dub is
produced but the film's target audience is not exclusively children, both
dubbed and subtitled versions are usually available in movie theaters. The
dubbed versions are more commonly shown in morning and early afternoon hours,
with the subtitled version dominating in the evening. Both can be available in
parallel at similar hours in multiplexes.

Russian television is generally dubbed, but in the cases using voice-over dub
technique with only a couple of voice actors, with the original speech still
audible underneath. In the Soviet Union, most foreign movies to be officially
released were dubbed. Voice-over dub was invented in the Soviet Union in the
1980s when with the fall of the regime, many popular foreign movies,
previously forbidden, or at least questionable under communist rule, started
to flood in, in the form of low-quality home-copied videos. Being unofficial
releases, they were dubbed in a very primitive way. For example, the
translator spoke the text directly over the audio of a video being copied,
using primitive equipment.

The quality of the resulting dub was very low, the translated phrases were
off-sync, interfering with the original voices, background sounds leaked into
the track, translation was inaccurate and, most importantly, all dub voices
were made by a single person who usually lacked the intonation of the
original, making comprehension of some scenes quite difficult. This method of
translation exerted a strong influence on Russian pop culture. Voices of
translators became recognizable for generations.

In modern Russia, the overdubbing technique is still used in many cases,
although with vastly improved quality, and now with multiple voice actors
dubbing different original voices. Video games are generally either dubbed
into Russian (for instance _The Legend of Spyro_ trilogy, _Skylanders_ series,
_Assassin's Creed_ saga, _Halo_ or _Harry Potter_ series etc.) or released
with original-speaking tracks but with all the texts translated into Russian
language.

Releases of cinemas are almost always dubbed in the Russian language. On
television series are shown as a dubbed translation and offscreen. Subtitles
are not used at all.

In Ukraine, since 2006 cinema releases are almost always dubbed into Ukrainian
with the overdubbing technique and multiple voice actors dubbing different
original voices with a small percent of art-house/documentaries shown in the
original language with Ukrainian subtitles. For television, TV channels
usually release movies and TV-shows with a Ukrainian voiceover, although
certain high-profile films and TV shows are dubbed rather than voice-overe'ed.

In the past Russian-language films, TV series, cartoons, animated series and
TV programs were usually not dubbed but were shown with the original audio
with Ukrainian subtitles. However, this practise has been slowly abandoned
since late 2010s: all children's films and cartoons regardless of the original
language (including Russian) are always dubbed into Ukrainian; example of the
first Russian cartoons dubbed into Ukrainian for the cinematic-release is The
Snow Queen 2 (2015), A Warrior's Tail (2015), Volki i Ovtsy: Be-e-e-zumnoe
prevrashenie (2016), Ivan Tsarevich i Seryy Volk 3 (2016), Bremenskie
razboyniki (2016), The Snow Queen 3: Fire and Ice (2017), Fantastic Journey to
OZ (2017), Fixies: Top Secret (2017) etc.; the same trend is seen among
Russian language feature films for adults, with the first such films dubbed
into Ukrainian including Battle for Sevastopol (2015), Hardcore Henry (2016),
The Duelist (2016).

In the United States and English-speaking Canada, live-action foreign films
are usually shown in theaters with their original languages (with English
subtitles). It is because live-action dubbed movies rarely did well in United
States box office since 1980's. The 1982 United States theatrical release of
Wolfgang Peterson’s _Das Boot_ was the last major release to go out in both
original and English-dubbed versions, and the film's original version actually
grossed much higher than the English-dubbed version.[26][27] Later on,
English-dubbed versions of international hits like _Un indien dans la ville_ ,
_Godzilla 2000_ , _Anatomy_ , _Pinocchio_ and _High Tension_ flopped at United
States box office.[28][29][30][31] When Miramax planned to release the
English-dubbed versions of _Shaolin Soccer_ and _Hero_ in the United States
cinemas, their English-dubbed versions scored badly in test screenings in the
United States, so Miramax finally released the films in United States cinemas
with their original language.[31][32] Still, English-dubbed movies have much
better commercial potential in ancillary market; therefore, more distributors
would release live-action foreign films in theaters with their original
languages (with English subtitles), then release both original versions and
English-dubbed versions in ancillary market.[33]

On the other hand, anime is almost always released in English-dubbed format,
regardless of its content or target age group. The exceptions to this practice
are either when an English dub has not been produced for the program (usually
in the case of feature films) or when the program is being presented by a
network that places importance on presenting it in its original format (as was
the case when Turner Classic Movies aired several of Hayao Miyazaki's works,
which were presented both dubbed and subtitled). Most anime DVDs contain
options for original Japanese, Japanese with subtitles, and English-dubbed,
except for a handful of series that have been heavily edited or Americanized.
In addition, Disney has a policy that makes its directors undergo stages to
perfect alignment of certain lip movements so the movie looks believable.

In addition, a small number of British films have been re-dubbed when released
in the United States, due to the usage of dialects which Americans are not
familiar with (for example, _Kes_ and _Trainspotting_ ). However, British
children's shows (such as _Bob the Builder_ ) are always re-dubbed with
American voice actors in order to make the series more understandable for
American children. Conversely, British programs shown in Canada are not re-
dubbed.

For Spanish-speaking countries, all foreign-language programs, films, cartoons
and documentaries shown on free-to-air TV networks are dubbed into Standard
Spanish, while broadcasts on cable and satellite pan-regional channels are
either dubbed or subtitled. In theaters, children's movies and most
blockbuster films are dubbed into Standard Spanish or Mexican Spanish, and are
sometimes further dubbed into regional dialects of Spanish where they are
released.

In Mexico, by law, films shown in theaters must be shown in their original
version. Films in languages other than Spanish are usually subtitled. Only
educational documentaries and movies rated for children, as well as some
movies that are expected to have a wide audience (for example, _The Lord of
the Rings: The Return of the King_ or _The Avengers_ ) may be dubbed, but this
is not compulsory, and some animated films are shown in theaters in both
dubbed and subtitled versions (for instance, some DreamWorks productions).
Nonetheless, a recent trend in several cinemas is to offer the dubbed versions
only, with a stark decrease in the showing of the original ones.

Dubbing must be made in Mexico by Mexican nationals or foreigners residing in
Mexico.[34] Still, several programs that are shown on pay TV are dubbed in
other countries like Venezuela, Chile or Colombia.

Most movies released on DVD feature neutral Spanish as a language option, and
sometimes feature a specific dub for Mexican audiences (for example, _Rio_ ).
Foreign programs are dubbed on broadcast TV, while on pay TV most shows and
movies are subtitled. It must be noted, however, that in a similar way to
cinemas, in the last few years many channels on pay TV have begun to broadcast
programs and films only in their dubbed version.

Dubbing became very popular in the 1990s with the rise in popularity of anime
in Mexico. Some voice actors have become celebrities and are always identified
with specific characters, such as Mario Castañeda (who became popular by
dubbing Goku in _Dragon Ball Z_ ) or Humberto Vélez (who dubbed Homer Simpson
in the first 15 seasons of _The Simpsons_ ).

The popularity of pay TV has allowed people to view several series in their
original language rather than dubbed. Dubbing has been criticized for the use
of TV or movie stars as voice actors (such as Ricky Martin in Disney's
_Hercules_ , or Eugenio Derbez in DreamWorks' _Shrek_ ), or for the incorrect
use of local popular culture that sometimes creates unintentional jokes or
breaks the feeling of the original work (such as translating Sheldon Cooper's
"Bazinga!" to "¡Vacilón!").

Several video games have been dubbed into neutral Spanish, rather than
European Spanish, in Mexico (such as the _Gears of War_ series, _Halo 3_ ,
_Infamous 2_ and others). Sony recently announced that more games (such as
_God of War: Ascension_ ) will be dubbed into neutral Spanish.

In Peru, all foreign series, movies, and animated programming are shown dubbed
in Latin American Spanish, with dubs imported from Mexico, Chile, Colombia and
Venezuela on terrestrial and pay-television. All movies intended for kids are
being offered as dub-only movies, while films aimed at older audiences are
being offered dubbed and subtitled in Spanish. Pay-TV channels show both
dubbed and subtitled version of every film they broadcast, being offered with
a separate subtitle track and a second audio track in English. There is an
increase of people preferring subtitle films and series rather than dubbed
starting the late-2000s, as Peruvians viewers tend to get used to their
original version.

Peru used to do not produce their own dubs since dubbing studios never existed
in that country until 2016, when the company "Big Bang Films" started to dub
movies and series, however, since 2014 a group of dubbing actors created a
group called "Torre A Doblaje", who is a group of actors who gives dubbing and
locution service.

In Brazil, foreign programs are invariably dubbed into Brazilian Portuguese on
free to air TV, with only a few exceptions. Films shown at cinemas are
generally offered with both subtitled and dubbed versions, with dubbing
frequently being the only choice for children's movies. Subtitling was
primarily for adult audience movies until 2012. Since then, dubbed versions
also became available for all ages. As a result, in recent years, more cinemas
have opened in Brazil, attracting new audiences to the cinema who prefer
dubbing. According to a Datafolha survey, 56% of Brazilian movie theaters'
audience prefer to watch dubbed movies.[35] Most of the dubbing studios in
Brazil is in the cities of Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo.[36]

The first film to be dubbed in Brazil was the Disney animation _"Snow White
and the Seven Dwarfs"_ in 1938. By the end of the 1950s, most of the movies,
TV series and cartoons on television in Brazil were shown in its original
sound and subtitles. However, in 1962, a decree of President Jânio Quadros
ruled that all foreign productions on television should be dubbed. This
measure boosted the growth of dubbing in Brazil, and has led to several
dubbing studios since then.[37] The biggest dubbing studio in Brazil was
Herbert Richers, headquartered in Rio de Janeiro and closed in 2009, At its
peak in the 80s and 90s, the Herbert Richers studios dubbed about 70% of the
productions shown in Brazilian cinemas.[38]

In the 90's, with Saint Seiya, Dragon Ball and other anime shows becoming
popular in Brazilian TV's, the voice actors and the dubbing career gained a
higher space in Brazilian culture. Actors like Hermes Baroli (Brazilian dubber
of Pegasus Seiya, in _Saint Seiya_ and actors like Ashton Kutcher), Marco
Ribeiro (Brazilian dubber of many actors like Tom Hanks, Jim Carrey and Robert
Downey Jr., and Yusuke Urameshi from the anime _Yu Yu Hakusho_ ) and Wendel
Bezerra (Brazilian dubber of Goku in _Dragon Ball Z_ and SpongeBob in
_SpongeBob SquarePants_ ) are recognized for their most notable roles.

Pay TV commonly offers both dubbed and subtitled movies, with statistics
showing that dubbed versions are becoming predominant.[39] Most DVD and Blu-
ray releases usually feature Portuguese, Spanish, and the original audio along
with subtitles in native languages. Most video games are dubbed in Brazilian
Portuguese rather than having European Portuguese dubs alone. Games such as
_Halo 3_ , _God of War: Ascension_ , _inFamous 2_ , _Assassin's Creed III_ ,
_Skylanders: Spyro's Adventure_ , _World of Warcraft_ and others are dubbed in
Brazilian Portuguese. This is because despite the dropping of the dubbing law
in Portugal in 1994, most companies in that country use the Brazilian
Portuguese because of traditional usage during the days of the dubbing rule,
along with these dubbings being more marketable than European Portuguese.

A list that showcases Brazilian Portuguese voice artists that dub for actors
and actresses are displayed here. However, there can also be different
official dub artists for certain regions within Brazil.

Apparently, for unknown reasons (probably technical), the Brazilian Portuguese
dub credits from some shows or cartoons from channels from Viacom or
Turner/Time Warner, are shown on Latin America (on Spanish-dubbed series).

In Quebec, Canada, most films and TV programs in English are dubbed into
Standard French, occasionally with Quebec French idiosyncrasies. Occasionally,
the dubbing of a series or a movie, such as _The Simpsons_ , is made using the
more widely spoken _joual_ variety of Quebec French. Dubbing has the advantage
of making children's films and TV series more comprehensible to younger
audiences. However, many bilingual Québécois prefer subtitling, since they
would understand some or all of the original audio. In addition, all films are
shown in English, as well in certain theaters (especially in major cities and
English-speaking areas such as the West Island), and some theatres, such as
the Scotiabank Cinema Montreal, show only movies in English. Most American
television series are only available in English on DVD, or on English-language
channels, but some of the more popular ones have French dubs shown on
mainstream networks, and are released in French on DVD as well, sometimes
separately from an English-only version.

Formerly, all French-language dubbed films in Quebec were imported from France
and some still are. Such a practice was criticized by former politician Mario
Dumont after he took his children to see the Parisian French dub of _Shrek the
Third_ , which Dumont found incomprehensible.[40] After his complaints and a
proposed bill, _Bee Movie_ , the film from DreamWorks Animation, was dubbed in
Quebec, making it the studio's first animated film to have a Quebec French
dub, as all DreamWorks Animation films had previously been dubbed in France.
In terms of Disney, the first Disney animated movie to be dubbed in Quebec was
_Oliver and Company._ The Disney Renaissance films were also dubbed in Quebec
except for _The Rescuers Down Under_ , _Beauty and the Beast_ , and _The Lion
King_.[41]

In addition, because Canadian viewers usually find Quebec French more
comprehensible than other dialects of the language, some older film series
that had the French-language versions of previous installments dubbed in
France have had later ones dubbed in Quebec, often creating inconsistencies
within the French version of the series' canon. Lucasfilm's _Star Wars_ and
_Indiana Jones_ series are examples. Both series had films released in the
1970s and 1980s, with no Québécois French dubbed versions; instead, the
Parisian French versions, with altered character and object names and terms,
were distributed in the province. However, later films in both series released
1999 and later were dubbed in Quebec, using different voice actors and
"reversing" name changes made in France's dubbings due to the change in
studio.

China has a long tradition of dubbing foreign films into Mandarin Chinese,
starting in the 1930s. While during the Republic of China era Western motion
pictures may have been imported and dubbed into Chinese, since 1950 Soviet
movies, dubbed primarily in Shanghai, became the main import.[42] Beginning in
the late 1970s, in addition to films, popular TV series from the United
States, Japan, Brazil, and Mexico were also dubbed. The Shanghai Film Dubbing
Studio has been the most well-known studio in the film dubbing industry in
China. In order to generate high-quality products, they divide each film into
short segments, each one lasting only a few minutes, and then work on the
segments one-by-one. In addition to the correct meaning in translation, they
make tremendous effort to match the lips of the actors to the dialogue. As a
result, the dubbing in these films generally is not readily detected. The cast
of dubbers is acknowledged at the end of a dubbed film. Several dubbing actors
and actresses of the Shanghai Film Dubbing Studio have become well-known
celebrities, such as Qiu Yuefeng, Bi Ke, Li Zi, and Liu Guangning. In recent
years, however, especially in the larger cities on the east and south coasts,
it has become increasingly common for movie theaters to show subtitled
versions with the original soundtracks intact.

Motion pictures are also dubbed into the languages of some of China's
autonomous regions. Notably, the Translation Department of the Tibetan
Autonomous Region Movie Company (西藏自治区电影公司译制科)[43] has been dubbing movies
into the Tibetan language since the 1960s. In the early decades, it would dub
25 to 30 movies each year, the number rising to 60-75 by the early
2010s.[43][44] Motion pictures are dubbed for China's Mongol- and Uyghur-
speaking markets as well.[45]

Taiwan dubs some foreign films and TV series in Mandarin Chinese. Until the
mid-1990s, the major national terrestrial channels both dubbed and subtitled
all foreign programs and films and, for some popular programs, the original
voices were offered in second audio program. Gradually, however, both
terrestrial and cable channels stopped dubbing for prime time U.S. shows and
films, while subtitling continued.

In the 2000s, the dubbing practice has differed depending on the nature and
origin of the program. Animations, children's shows and some educational
programs on PTS are mostly dubbed. English live-action movies and shows are
not dubbed in theaters or on television. Japanese TV dramas are no longer
dubbed, while Korean dramas, Hong Kong dramas and dramas from other Asian
countries are still often dubbed. Korean variety shows are not dubbed.
Japanese and Korean films on Asian movie channels are still dubbed. In
theaters, most foreign films are not dubbed, while animated films and some
films meant for children offer a dubbed version. Hong Kong live-action films
have a long tradition of being dubbed into Mandarin, while more famous films
offer a Cantonese version.

In Hong Kong, foreign television programmes, except for English-language and
Mandarin television programmes, are dubbed in Cantonese. English-language and
Mandarin programmes are generally shown in their original with subtitles.
Foreign films, such as most live-action and animated films (such as anime and
Disney), are usually dubbed in Cantonese. However most cinemas also offer
subtitled versions of English-language films.

For the most part, foreign films and TV programmes, both live-action and
animated, are generally dubbed in both Mandarin and Cantonese. For example, in
_The Lord of the Rings_ film series, Elijah Wood's character Frodo Baggins was
dubbed into Mandarin by Jiang Guangtao for China and Taiwan. For the Cantonese
localization, there were actually two dubs for Hong Kong and Macau. The first
Cantonese dub, he was voiced by Leung Wai Tak, with a second Cantonese dub
released, he was voiced by Bosco Tang.

A list for Mandarin and Cantonese voice artists that dub for actors are shown
here.

In Israel, only children's movies and TV programming are dubbed in Hebrew. In
programs aimed at teenagers and adults, dubbing is rarely considered for
translation, not only because of its high costs, but also because the audience
is mainly multi-lingual. Most viewers in Israel speak at least one European
language in addition to Hebrew, and a large part of the audience also speaks
Arabic. Therefore, most viewers prefer to hear the original soundtrack, aided
by Hebrew subtitles. Another problem is that dubbing does not allow for
translation into two different languages simultaneously, as is often the case
of Israeli television channels that use subtitles in Hebrew and another
language (like Russian) simultaneously.

In Japan, many television programs appear on Japanese television subtitled or
dubbed if they are intended for children. When the American film _Morocco_ was
released in Japan in 1931, subtitles became the mainstream method of
translating TV programs and films in Japan. Later, around the 1950s, foreign
television programs and films began to be shown dubbed in Japanese on
television. The first ones to be dubbed into Japanese were the 1940s Superman
cartoons in 1955.

Due to the lack of video software for domestic television, video software was
imported from abroad. When the television program was shown on television, it
was mostly dubbed. There was a character limit for a small TV screen at a
lower resolution, and this method was not suitable for the poor elderly and
illiterate eye, as was audio dubbing. Presently, TV shows and movies (both
those aimed at all ages and adults-only) are shown dubbed with the original
language and Japanese subtitles, while providing the original language option
when the same film is released on VHS, DVD and Blu-ray. Laserdisc releases of
Hollywood films were almost always subtitled.

Adult cartoons such as _Family Guy_ , _South Park_ , and _The Simpsons_ are
shown dubbed in Japanese on the WOWOW TV channel. _South Park: Bigger, Longer
and Uncut_ was dubbed in Japanese by different actors instead of the same
Japanese dubbing-actors from the cartoon because it was handled by a different
Japanese dubbing studio, and it was marketed for the Kansai market. In
Japanese theaters, foreign-language movies, except those intended for
children, are usually shown in their original version with Japanese subtitles.
Foreign films usually contain multiple Japanese-dubbing versions, but with
several different original Japanese-dubbing voice actors, depending upon which
TV station they are aired. NHK, Nippon TV, Fuji TV, TV Asahi, and TBS usually
follow this practice, as do software releases on VHS, Laserdisc, DVD and Blu-
ray. As for recent foreign films being released, there are now some film
theaters in Japan that show both dubbed and subtitled editions.

On 22 June 2009, 20th Century Fox's Japanese division has opened up a Blu-Ray
lineup known as "Emperor of Dubbing", dedicated at having multiple Japanese
dubs of popular English-language films (mostly Hollywood films) as well as
retaining the original scripts, releasing them altogether in special Blu-Ray
releases. These also feature a new dub created exclusively for that release as
a director's cut, or a new dub made with a better surround sound mix to match
that of the original English mix (as most older Japanese dubbings were made on
mono mixes to be aired on TV). Other companies have followed practice, like
Universal Pictures's Japanese division NBCUniversal Entertainment Japan
opening up "Reprint of Memories", along with Warner Bros Japan having "Power
of Dubbing", which act in a similar way by re-packaging all the multiple
Japanese dubs of popular films and putting them out as Special Blu-ray
releases.

"Japanese dub-over artists" provide the voices for certain performers, such as
those listed in the following table:

In South Korea, anime that are imported from Japan are generally shown dubbed
in Korean on television. However, some anime is censored, such as Japanese
letters or content being edited for a suitable Korean audience. Western
cartoons are dubbed in Korean as well, such as Nickelodeon cartoons like
_SpongeBob SquarePants_ and _Danny Phantom_. Several English-language (mostly
American) live-action films are dubbed in Korean, but they are not shown in
theaters. Instead they are only broadcast on South Korean television networks
(KBS, MBC, SBS, EBS), while DVD import releases of these films are shown with
Korean subtitles, such as _The Wizard of Oz_ , _Mary Poppins_ , the _Star
Wars_ films, and _Avatar_. This may be due to the fact that the six American
major film studios may not own any rights to the Korean dubs of their live-
action films that the Korean television networks have dubbed and aired. Even
if they don't own the rights, Korean or non-Korean viewers can record from
Korean-dubbed live-action films from television broadcasting onto DVDs with
DVRs.

Sometimes, video games are dubbed in Korean. Examples would be the _Halo_
series, the _Jak& Daxter_ series, and the _God of War_ series. For the _Halo_
games, Lee Jeong Gu provides his Korean voice to the main protagonist Master
Chief (replacing Steve Downes's voice), while Kim So Hyeong voices Chieftain
Tartarus, one of the main antagonists (replacing Kevin Michael Richardson's
voice).

The following South Korean voice-over artists are usually identified with the
following actors:

In Thailand, foreign television programs are dubbed in Thai, but the original
soundtrack is often simultaneously carried on a NICAM audio track on
terrestrial broadcast, and alternate audio tracks on satellite broadcast.
Previously, terrestrial stations simulcasted the original soundtrack on the
radio.[46] On pay-TV, many channels carry foreign-language movies and
television programs with subtitles. Movie theaters in Bangkok and some larger
cities show both the subtitled version and the dubbed version of English-
language movies. In big cities like Bangkok, Thai-language movies have English
subtitles.

This list features a collection of Thai voice actors and actresses that have
dubbed for these featured performers.

Unlike movie theaters in most Asian countries, those in Indonesia show foreign
movies with subtitles. Then a few years or months later, those movies appear
on TV either dubbed in Indonesian or subtitled. Kids shows are mostly dubbed,
even though in cartoon series, songs aren't dubbed, but in big movies such as
Disney movies, both speaking and singing voice were cast for the new
Indonesian dub even though it took maybe a few months or even years for the
movie to come out. Adult films was mostly subtitled, but sometimes they can be
dubbed as well, because there aren't many Indonesian voices, mostly in dubbed
movies, three character can have exactly the same voice.

Reality shows never dubbed in Indonesian, because it was not a planned-
interaction such as in movies, so if they appear in TV, it will be appear with
subtitles on it.

In the Philippines, media practitioners generally have mixed practices
regarding whether to dub television programes or films, even within the same
kind of medium. They have mixed only with the dub television files and for G
and PG graph square boundary.

The prevalence of media needing to be dubbed has resulted in a talent pool
that is very capable of syncing voice to lip, especially for shows broadcast
by the country's three largest networks. It is not uncommon in the Filipino
dub industry to have most of the voices in a series dubbing by only a handful
of voice talents. English-language programmes used to usually air in their
original language in free-to-air television. However, since the late
1990s/early 2000s, more English-language programmes that air on major free-to-
air networks (i.e. TV5, ABS-CBN, GMA) have been dubbed into Tagalog. Even
Studio 23 (now ABS-CBN Sports and Action) which used to show all of its
foreign programmes in English, had adopted dubbing for some of its foreign
programmes. Children's programmes from cable networks Nickelodeon, Cartoon
Network, and Disney Channel shown on TV5 or ABS-CBN, have long been dubbed
into Tagalog or another Philippine regional language. Also animated Disney
films are often dubbed in Tagalog, except for the singing parts, which retains
its original language (though in recent years, there has been an increase in
number of Disney musicals having their songs also translated such as _Frozen_
). Dubbing is less common in smaller free-to-air networks such as ETC, 2nd
Avenue and the former RPN and the original language version is aired. Also
popular in the Philippines are Chinese, Korean, and Mexican dramas, which are
called _Chinovelas_ , _Koreanovelas_ , and _Mexicanovelas_ , respectively. All
of these dramas have always been dubbed in Tagalog or another Philippine
regional language, with its unique set of Filipino-speaking voice actors.

As of late 2018 only two Nickelodeon shows are aired in Filipino Dub on ABS-
CBN after the Nick block was dissolved while GMA Network have lots of them.

The original language version of TV programmes is also usually available on
cable/satellite channels such as Fox Life, Fox, and AXN. However, some
channels where foreign films or TV series are dubbed into Tagalog have
proliferated. Cinema One, ABS-CBN's cable movie channel, shows some films from
abroad dubbed into Tagalog. Nat Geo Wild airs most programs dubbed into
Tagalog for Philippine audiences, being one of the few cable channels to do
so. Tagalized Movie Channel & Tag airs Hollywood and Asian movies dubbed in
Tagalog. Fox Filipino airs some English, Latin, and Asian series dubbed in
Tagalog such as _The Walking Dead_ , _Devious Maids_ , _La Teniente_ ,
_Kdabra_ , and some selected programs from Channel M. GMA News TV airs some
English-language documentaries, movies, and reality series dubbed in Tagalog.
The defunct channel HERO TV, which focuses on anime and tokusatsu shows and
now a web portal, dubs all its foreign programs into Tagalog. This is in
contrast to Animax, where their anime programs dubbed in English.

Foreign films especially English films shown in cinemas are almost always
shown in their original language. Non-English films make use of English
subtitles. Unlike other countries, children's films in English are not dubbed
in cinemas.

A list of voice actors with their associates that they dub into Tagalog are
listed here.

In India, where "foreign films" are synonymous with "Hollywood films", dubbing
is done mostly in Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. Dubbing is rarely done with the
other major Indian languages, namely Malayalam and Bengali, due to lack of
significant market size. Despite this, some Kannada and Malayalam dubs of
children television programs can be seen on the Sun TV channel. The dubbed
versions are released into the towns and lower tier settlements of the
respective states (where English penetration is low), often with the English-
language originals released in the metropolitan areas. In all other states,
the English originals are released along with the dubbed versions, where often
the dubbed version collections are more outstanding than the originals.
_Spider-Man 3_ was also done in the Bhojpuri language, a language popular in
eastern India in addition to Hindi, Tamil and Telugu. _A Good Day to Die Hard_
, the most recent installment in the _Die Hard_ franchise, was the first ever
Hollywood film to receive a Punjabi language dub as well.

Most TV channels mention neither the Indian-language dubbing credits, nor its
staff, at the end of the original ending credits, since changing the credits
casting for the original actors or voice actors involves a huge budget for
modifying, making it somewhat difficult to find information for the dubbed
versions. The same situation is encountered for films. Sometimes foreign
programs and films receive more than one dub, such as for example, Jumanji,
Dragonheart and Van Helsing having two Hindi dubs. Information for the Hindi,
Tamil and Telugu voice actors who have done the voices for specific actors and
for their roles on foreign films and television programs are published in
local Indian data magazines, for those that are involved in the dubbing
industry in India. But on a few occasions, there are some foreign productions
that do credit the dubbing cast, such as animated films like the _Barbie_
films, and some Disney films. Disney Channel original series released on DVD
with their Hindi dubs show a list of the artists in the Hindi dub credits,
after the original ending credits. Theatrical releases and VCD releases of
foreign films do not credit the dubbing cast or staff. The DVD releases,
however, do have credits for the dubbing staff, if they are released
multilingual. As of recently, information for the dubbing staff of foreign
productions have been expanding due to high demands of people wanting to know
the voice actors behind characters in foreign works. Large dubbing studios in
India include Sound & Vision India, Main Frame Software Communications, Visual
Reality, ZamZam Productions, Treasure Tower International, Blue Whale
Entertainment, Jai Hand Entertainment, Sugar Mediaz and Rudra Sound Solutionz.

A list of Indian dubbing artists is shown here.

In Pakistan "foreign films", and cartoons are not normally dubbed locally.
Instead, foreign films, anime and cartoons, such as those shown on Nickelodeon
Pakistan and Cartoon Network Pakistan, are dubbed in Hindi in India, as Hindi
and Urdu, the national language of Pakistan, are mutually intelligible.
However, soap operas from Turkey are now dubbed in Urdu and have gained
increased popularity at the expense of Indian soap operas in Hindi.[47] This
has led to protests from local producers that these are a threat to Pakistan's
television industry, with local productions being moved out of peak viewing
time or dropped altogether.[48] Similarly, politicians leaders have expressed
concerns over their content, given Turkey's less conservative culture.[49]

In Vietnam, foreign-language films and programs are subtitled on television in
Vietnamese. They were not dubbed until 1985, but are briefly translated with a
speaker before commercial breaks. _Rio_ was considered to be the very first
American Hollywood film to be entirely dubbed in Vietnamese. Since then,
children's films that came out afterwards have been released dubbed in
theaters. HTV3 has dubbed television programs for children, including _Ben 10_
, and _Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide_ , by using various voice
actors to dub over the character roles.[50][51]

Sooner afterwards, more programs started to get dubbed. HTV3 also offers anime
dubbed into Vietnamese. Pokémon got a Vietnamese dub in early 2014 on HTV3
starting with the Best Wishes series. But due to a controversy regarding
Pokémon's cries being re-dubbed despite that all characters had their Japanese
names, it was switched to VTV2 in September 2015 when the XY series debut.
Sailor Moon also recently has been dubbed for HTV3 in Early 2015.

In multilingual Singapore, dubbing is rare for western programmes. English-
language programmes on the free-to-air terrestrial channels are usually
subtitled in Chinese or Malay. Chinese, Malay and Tamil programmes (except for
news bulletins), usually have subtitles in English and the original language
during the prime time hours. Dual sound programs, such as Korean and Japanese
dramas, offer sound in the original languages with subtitles, Mandarin-dubbed
and subtitled, or English-dubbed. The deliberate policy to encourage Mandarin
among citizens made it required by law for programs in other Chinese dialects
(Hokkien, Cantonese and Teochew) to be dubbed into Mandarin, with the
exception of traditional operas. Cantonese and Hokkien shows from Hong Kong
and Taiwan, respectively, are available on VCD and DVD. In a recent
development, news bulletins are subtitled.

In Iran, foreign films and television programs are dubbed in Persian. Dubbing
began in 1946 with the advent of movies and cinemas in the country. Since
then, foreign movies have always been dubbed for the cinema and TV. Using
various voice actors and adding local hints and witticisms to the original
contents, dubbing played a major role in attracting people to the cinemas and
developing an interest in other cultures. The dubbing art in Iran reached its
apex during the 1960s and 1970s with the inflow of American, European and
Hindi movies.

The most famous musicals of the time, such as _My Fair Lady_ and _The Sound of
Music_ , were translated, adjusted and performed in Persian by the voice
artists. Since the 1990s, for political reasons and under pressure from the
state, the dubbing industry has declined, with movies dubbed only for the
state TV channels. During recent years, DVDs with Persian subtitles have found
a market among viewers for the same reason, but most people still prefer the
Persian-speaking dubbed versions. Recently, privately operated companies
started dubbing TV series by hiring famous dubbers.

A list of Persian voice actors that associate with their actor counterparts
are listed here.

In Georgia, original soundtracks are kept in films and TV series, but with
voice-over translation. There are exceptions, such as some children's
cartoons.

In Azerbaijan, dubbing is rare, as most Azerbaijani channels such as ARB Günəş
air voice-overs or Azerbaijan originals.

In Algeria and Morocco, most foreign movies (especially Hollywood productions)
are shown dubbed in French. These movies are usually imported directly from
French film distributors. The choice of movies dubbed into French can be
explained by the history of colonization of these countries by France and the
widespread use of the French language (among the intellectual elite), in
addition to the marginalization the two spoken languages, Berber and Darija.
Another important factor is that local theaters and private media companies do
not dub in local languages in order to avoid high costs, but also because of
the lack of both expertise and demand.

Beginning in the 1980s, dubbed series and movies for children in Modern
Standard Arabic became a popular choice among most TV channels, cinemas and
VHS/DVD stores. However, dubbed films are still imported, and dubbing is
performed in Arab countries with a strong tradition of dubbing and subtitling
(mainly Syria, Lebanon and Jordan). The evolution of movies targeting the
adult audience was different. After the satellite boom in the Arab world and
the emergence of Pan-Arab channels, the use of subtitles, which was already
popular in the Middle East, was highly popular among local viewers in Algeria
and Morocco.

In the Arab world (member states in North Africa, Western Asia and others),
only children's films and TV series were dubbed in Arabic. Many different
anime titles are dubbed in the Arabic language, as well. Everything else is
usually shown in its original language with Arabic subtitles. Recently, The
Arabic dubbing industry has boomed, and channels such as MBC Max, are now
offering famous older action films aimed at an older audience dubbed in Arabic
to be broadcast on television. Action movies such as _Braveheart_ , _The Lord
of the Rings_ film trilogy and _Troy_ have become some of the first foreign
action titles to be dubbed in Arabic, rather than using subtitles, on the MBC
Max channel. However, they can still be watched in their original language
with subtitles.[52]

There's even a list that showcases Arabic voice actors that dub for certain
performers that associate with them.

In Tunisia, theaters usually show French-dubbed movies, but cinema attendance
in the country for such movies is in continuous decline compared to Tunisian
and Arab movies. This decline can be traced to the huge popularity of free-to-
air Pan-Arab movie channels offering primarily subtitled content, and the
government's reduced efforts to limit piracy. Tunisia National Television
(TNT), the public broadcaster of Tunisia, is not allowed to show any content
in any language other than Arabic, which forces it to broadcast only dubbed
content (this restriction was recently removed for commercials). During the
1970s and 1980s, TNT (known as ERTT at the time) started dubbing famous
cartoons in Tunisian and Standard Arabic. This move was highly successful
locally, but was not able to compete with mainstream dubbing companies
(especially in the Middle East). In the private sector, television channels
are not subject to the language rule and sometimes broadcast foreign content
dubbed into French (excluding children content), although some of them, such
as Hannibal TV, started adopting subtitling in Arabic instead, which proved to
be more popular than simply importing French-dubbed content.[ _dubious –
discuss_]

In South Africa, many television programmes were dubbed in Afrikaans, with the
original soundtrack (usually in English, but sometimes Dutch or German)
"simulcast" in FM stereo on Radio 2000.[53] These included US series such as
_The Six Million Dollar Man_ , _(Steve Austin: Die Man van Staal)_[54] _Miami
Vice_ _(Misdaad in Miami)_ ,[55] _Beverly Hills 90210_ ,[56] and the German
detective series _Derrick_.[57]

As a result of the boycott by the British actors' union Equity, which banned
the sale of most British television programmes, the puppet series _The
Adventures of Rupert Bear_ was dubbed into South African English, as the
original voices had been recorded by Equity voice artists.[58]

This practice has declined as a result of the reduction of airtime for the
language on SABC TV, and the increase of locally produced material in
Afrikaans on other channels like KykNet. Similarly, many programmes, such as
_The Jeffersons_ , were dubbed into Zulu,[59] but this has also declined as
local drama production has increased. However, some animated films, such as
_Maya the Bee_ , have been dubbed in both Afrikaans and Zulu by local
artists.[60]

Uganda's own film industry is fairly small, and foreign movies are commonly
watched. The English sound track is often accompanied by the Luganda
translation and comments, provided by an Ugandan "video jockey" (VJ). VJ's
interpreting and narration may be available in a recorded form or live.[61]

In common with other English-speaking countries, there has traditionally been
little dubbing in Australia, with foreign language television programmes and
films being shown (usually on SBS) with subtitles or English dubs produced in
other countries. This has also been the case in New Zealand, but the Māori
Television Service, launched in 2004, has dubbed animated films into
Māori.[62] However, some TV commercials from foreign countries are dubbed,
even if the original commercial came from another English-speaking country.

Subtitles can be used instead of dubbing, as different countries have
different traditions regarding the choice between dubbing and subtitling. On
DVDs with higher translation budgets, the option for both types will often be
provided to account for individual preferences; purists often demand
subtitles. For small markets (small language area or films for a select
audience), subtitling is more suitable, because it is cheaper. In the case of
films for small children who cannot yet read, or do not read fast enough,
dubbing is necessary.

In most English-speaking countries, dubbing is comparatively rare. In Israel,
some programmes need to be comprehensible to speakers of both Russian and
Hebrew. This cannot be accomplished with dubbing, so subtitling is much more
commonplace—sometimes even with subtitles in multiple languages, with the
soundtrack remaining in the original language, usually English. The same
applies to certain television shows in Finland, where Swedish and Finnish are
both official languages.

In the Netherlands, Flanders, Nordic countries, Estonia and Portugal, films
and television programmes are shown in the original language (usually English)
with subtitles, and only cartoons and children's movies and programs are
dubbed, such as the _Harry Potter_ series, _Finding Nemo_ , _Shrek_ , _Charlie
and the Chocolate Factory_ and others. Cinemas usually show both a dubbed
version and one with subtitles for this kind of movie, with the subtitled
version shown later in the evening.

In Portugal, one terrestrial channel, TVI, dubbed U.S. series like _Dawson's
Creek_ into Portuguese.[63] RTP also transmitted _Friends_ in a dubbed
version, but it was poorly received and later re-aired in a subtitled version.
Cartoons, on the other hand, are usually dubbed, sometimes by well-known
actors, even on TV. Animated movies are usually released to the cinemas in
both subtitled and dubbed versions.

In Argentina and Venezuela, terrestrial channels air films and TV series in a
dubbed version, as demanded by law. However, those same series can be seen on
cable channels at more accessible time-slots in their subtitled version and
usually before they are shown on open TV. In contrast, the series _The
Simpsons_ is aired in its Mexican Spanish-dubbed version both on terrestrial
television and on the cable station Fox, which broadcasts the series for the
area. Although the first season of the series appeared with subtitles, this
was not continued for the following seasons.

In Bulgaria, television series are dubbed, but most television channels use
subtitles for action and drama movies. AXN uses subtitles for its series, but
as of 2008 emphasizes dubbing. Only Diema channels dub all programs. Movies in
theaters, with the exception of films for children, use dubbing and subtitles.
Dubbing of television programs is usually done using voiceovers, but usually,
voices professional actors, while trying to give each character a different
voice by using appropriate intonations. Dubbing with synchronized voices is
rarely used, mostly for animated films. _Mrs. Doubtfire_ is a rare example of
a feature film dubbed this way on BNT Channel 1, though a subtitled version is
currently shown on other channels.

Walt Disney Television's animated series (such as _DuckTales_ , _Darkwing
Duck_ , and _Timon& Pumbaa_) were only aired with synchronized Bulgarian
voices on BNT Channel 1 until 2005, but then the Disney shows were canceled.
When airing of Disney series resumed on Nova Television and Jetix in 2008,
voiceovers were used, but Disney animated-movie translations still use
synchronized voices. Voiceover dubbing is not used in theatrical releases. The
Bulgarian film industry law requires all children's films to be dubbed, not
subtitled. Nova Television dubbed and aired the _Pokémon_ anime with
synchronized voices. Now, the show is airing on Disney Channel, also in a
synchronized form.

Netflix provides both subtitles and dubbed audio with its foreign language
shows, including Brazil’s dystopian “3%” and the German thriller "Dark".
Viewer testing indicates that its audience is more likely to finish watching a
series if they select to view it with dubbed audio rather than translated
subtitles. Netflix now streams its foreign language content with dubbed audio
as default in an effort to increase viewer retention.[64]

Dubbing is also used in applications and genres other than traditional film,
including video games, television, and pornographic films.

Many video games originally produced in North America, Japan, and PAL
countries are dubbed into foreign languages for release in areas such as
Europe and Australia, especially for video games that place a heavy emphasis
on dialogue. Because characters' mouth movements can be part of the game's
code, lip sync is sometimes achieved by re-coding the mouth movements to match
the dialogue in the new language. The Source engine automatically generates
lip-sync data, making it easier for games to be localized.

To achieve synchronization when animations are intended only for the source
language, localized content is mostly recorded using techniques borrowed from
movie dubbing (such as rythmo band) or, when images are not available,
localized dubbing is done using source audios as a reference. Sound-synch is a
method where localized audios are recorded matching the length and internal
pauses of the source content.

For the European version of a video game, the on-screen text of the game is
available in various languages and, in many cases, the dialogue is dubbed into
each respective language, as well.

The North American version of any game is always available in English, with
translated text and dubbed dialogue, if necessary, in other languages,
especially if the North American version of the game contains the same data as
the European version. Several Japanese games, such as those in the _Sonic the
Hedgehog_ , _Dynasty Warriors_ , and _Soul_ series, are released with both the
original Japanese audio and the English dub included.

Dubbing is occasionally used on network television broadcasts of films that
contain dialogue that the network executives or censors have decided to
replace. This is usually done to remove profanity. In most cases, the original
actor does not perform this duty, but an actor with a similar voice reads the
changes. The results are sometimes seamless, but, in many cases, the voice of
the replacement actor sounds nothing like the original performer, which
becomes particularly noticeable when extensive dialogue must be replaced.
Also, often easy to notice, is the sudden absence of background sounds in the
movie during the dubbed dialogue. Among the films considered notorious for
using substitute actors that sound very different from their theatrical
counterparts are the _Smokey and the Bandit_ and the _Die Hard_ film series,
as shown on broadcasters such as TBS. In the case of _Smokey and the Bandit_ ,
extensive dubbing was done for the first network airing on ABC Television in
1978, especially for Jackie Gleason's character, Buford T. Justice. The
dubbing of his phrase "sombitch" (son of a bitch) became "scum bum," which
became a catchphrase of the time.

Dubbing is commonly used in science fiction television, as well. Sound
generated by effects equipment such as animatronic puppets or by actors'
movements on elaborate multi-level plywood sets (for example, starship bridges
or other command centers) will quite often make the original character
dialogue unusable. _Stargate_ and _Farscape_ are two prime examples where ADR
is used heavily to produce usable audio.

Since some anime series contain profanity, the studios recording the English
dubs often re-record certain lines if a series or movie is going to be
broadcast on Cartoon Network, removing references to death and hell as well.
Some companies will offer both an edited and an uncut version of the series on
DVD, so that there is an edited script available in case the series is
broadcast. Other companies also edit the full-length version of a series,
meaning that even on the uncut DVD characters say things like "Blast!" and
"Darn!" in place of the original dialogue's profanity. Bandai Entertainment's
English dub of _G Gundam_ is infamous for this, among many other things, with
such lines as "Bartender, more milk".

Dubbing has also been used for comedic purposes, replacing lines of dialogue
to create comedies from footage that was originally another genre. Examples
include the Australian shows _The Olden Days_ and _Bargearse_ , re-dubbed from
1970s Australian drama and action series, respectively, the Irish show _Soupy
Norman_ , re-dubbed from _Pierwsza miłość_ , a Polish soap opera, and _Most
Extreme Elimination Challenge_ , a comedic dub of the Japanese show _Takeshi's
Castle_.

Dubbing into a foreign language does not always entail the deletion of the
original language. In some countries, a performer may read the translated
dialogue as a voice-over. This often occurs in Russia and Poland, where
"lektories" or "lektors" read the translated dialogue into Russian and Polish.
In Poland, one announcer read all text. However, this is done almost
exclusively for the television and home video markets, while theatrical
releases are usually subtitled. Recently, however, the number of high-quality,
fully dubbed films has increased, especially for children's movies. If a
quality dubbed version exists for a film, it is shown in theaters. However,
some films, such as _Harry Potter_ or _Star Wars_ , are shown in both dubbed
and subtitled versions, varying with the time of the show. Such films are also
shown on TV (although some channels drop them and do standard one-narrator
translation) and VHS/DVD. In other countries, like Vietnam, the voice-over
technique is also used for theatrical releases.

In Russia, the reading of all lines by a single person is referred to as a
Gavrilov translation, and is generally found only in illegal copies of films
and on cable television. Professional copies always include at least two
actors of opposite gender translating the dialogue. Some titles in Poland have
been dubbed this way, too, but this method lacks public appeal, so it is very
rare now.

On special occasions, such as film festivals, live interpreting is often done
by professionals.

As budgets for pornographic films are often small, compared to films made by
major studios, and there is an inherent need to film without interrupting
filming, it is common for sex scenes to be over-dubbed. The audio for such
over-dubbing is generally referred to as _the Ms and Gs_ , or _the moans and
groans._

In the case of languages with large communities (such as English, Chinese,
Portuguese, German, Spanish, or French), a single translation may sound
foreign to native speakers in a given region. Therefore, a film may be
translated into a dialect of a certain language. For example, the animated
movie _The Incredibles_ was translated to European Spanish, Mexican Spanish,
Neutral Spanish (which is Mexican Spanish but avoids colloquialisms), and
Rioplatense Spanish (although people from Chile and Uruguay noticed a strong
_porteño_ accent from most of the characters of the Rioplatense Spanish
translation).[ _citation needed_ ] In Spanish-speaking regions, most media is
dubbed twice: into Spanish (Spain) and Neutral Spanish.

Another example is the French dubbing of _The Simpsons_ , which has two
entirely different versions for Quebec and for France. The humor is very
different for each audience (see Non-English versions of _The Simpsons_).
Audiences in Quebec are generally critical of France's dubbing of _The
Simpsons_ , which they often do not find amusing.

Quebec-French dubbing of films is generally made in accent-free Standard
French, but may sound peculiar to audiences in France because of the
persistence of some regionally-neutral expressions and because Quebec-French
performers pronounce Anglo-Saxon names with an American accent, unlike French
performers. Occasionally, budget restraints cause American direct-to-video
films, such as the 1995 film _When the Bullet Hits the Bone_ , to be released
in France with a Quebec-French dubbing, sometimes resulting in what some
members of French audiences perceive as unintentional humor.

Portugal and Brazil also use different versions of dubbed films and series.
Because dubbing has never been very popular in Portugal, for decades,
children's films were distributed using the higher-quality Brazilian dub
(unlike children's TV series, which are traditionally dubbed in European
Portuguese). Only in the 1990s did dubbing begin to gain popularity in
Portugal. _The Lion King_ became the first Disney feature film to be
completely dubbed into European Portuguese, and subsequently all major
animation films gained European-Portuguese versions. In recent DVD releases,
most Brazilian-Portuguese-dubbed classics were released with new European-
Portuguese dubs, eliminating the predominance of Brazilian-Portuguese dubs in
Portugal.

Similarly, in the Dutch-speaking region of Flanders, Belgium, cartoons are
often dubbed locally by Flemish artists[ _citation needed_ ] rather than using
soundtracks produced in the Netherlands.

The German-speaking region, which includes Germany, Austria, part of
Switzerland, and Liechtenstein, share a common German-dubbed version of films
and shows. Although there are some differences in German dialects, all films,
shows, and series are dubbed into a single Standard German version that avoids
regional variations in the German-speaking audience. Most voice actors are
primarily German or Austrian. Switzerland, which has four official languages
(German, French, Italian, and Romansh), generally uses dubbed versions made in
each respective country (except for Romansh). Liechtenstein uses German-dubbed
versions only.

Sometimes, films are also dubbed into several German dialects[ _citation
needed_ ] (Berlinerisch, Kölsch, Saxonian, Austro-Bavarian or Swiss German),
especially animated films and Disney films. They are as an additional "special
feature" to entice the audience into buying it. Popular animated films dubbed
into German dialects include _Asterix_ films (in addition to its Standard
German version, every film has a particular dialect version), _The Little
Mermaid_ ,[ _citation needed_ ] _Shrek 2_ ,[ _citation needed_ ] _Cars_ , (+
Austrian German)[ _citation needed_ ] and _Up_[65] (+ Austrian German).

Some live-action films or TV-series have an additional German dialect dubbing:
_Babe_[66][ _better source needed_ ] and its sequel, _Babe: Pig in the City_
(German German, Austrian German, Swiss German); and _Rehearsal for Murder_ ,
_Framed_[67] (+ Austrian German); _The Munsters_ , _Serpico_ , _Rumpole_ (+
Austrian German), and _The Thorn Birds_[68] (only Austrian German dubbing).

Before German reunification, East Germany also made its own particular German
version. For example, _Olsen Gang_ and the Hungarian animated series _The
Mézga Family_ were dubbed in West Germany as well as East Germany.

Usually, there are two dubbings produced in Serbo-Croatian: Serbian and
Croatian. Serbian for Serbia, Montenegro and Bosnia & Herzegovina; Croatian
for Croatia and parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

While the voice actors involved usually bear the brunt of criticisms towards
poor dubbing, other factors may include inaccurate script translation and poor
audio mixing. Dialogue typically contains speech patterns and sentence
structure that are natural to the original language but would appear awkward
if translated literally. English dubs of Japanese animation, for example, must
rewrite the dialogue so that it flows smoothly while following the natural
pattern of English speech. On some occasions, voice actors record their
dialogue individually instead of with the rest of the cast, and their
performances can lack the dynamics gained from performing as a group.[
_citation needed_ ]

Many martial arts movies from Hong Kong that were imported under the
unofficial banner Kung Fu Theater were notorious[ _according to whom?_ ] for
seemingly careless dubbing that included poor lip sync and awkward dialogue.
Since the results were frequently unintentionally humorous, it has become one
of the hallmarks that endear these films to fans of the 1980s culture.

