**Dudley Stuart John Moore** , CBE (19 April 1935 – 27 March 2002) was an
English actor, comedian, musician and composer.

Moore first came to prominence in the UK as one of the four writer-performers
in the comedy revue _Beyond the Fringe_ from 1960, and with one member of that
team, Peter Cook, collaborated on the television series _Not Only... But
Also_. The double act worked on other projects until the mid-1970s, by which
time Moore had settled in Los Angeles to concentrate on his film acting.

His solo career as a comedy film actor was heightened by the success of hit
Hollywood films, particularly _Foul Play_ (1978), _10_ (1979) and _Arthur_
(1981). For _Arthur_ , Moore was nominated for the Academy Award for Best
Actor and won a Golden Globe Award. He received a second Golden Globe for his
performance in _Micki& Maude_ (1984).

Moore was born at the original Charing Cross Hospital in central London, the
son of Ada Francis (née Hughes), a secretary, and John Moore, a railway
electrician. His father was Scottish, from Glasgow.[1] Moore was brought up in
Dagenham, Essex. He was notably short at 5 ft 2 in (1.57 m) and was born with
club feet that required extensive hospital treatment and, coupled with his
diminutive stature, made him the butt of jokes from other children. His right
foot responded well to corrective treatment and had straightened itself by the
time he was six, but his left foot became permanently twisted and consequently
his left leg below the knee was withered. This was something of which he
remained very self-conscious throughout his life.

Moore became a choirboy at the age of six. At age eleven he earned a
scholarship to the Guildhall School of Music, where he took up harpsichord,
organ, violin, musical theory and composition.[2] He rapidly developed into a
highly talented pianist and organist and was playing the pipe organ at local
church weddings by the age of 14. He attended Dagenham County High School
where he received musical tuition from a dedicated teacher, Peter Cork, who
became a friend and confidant to Moore and continued to correspond with him
until 1994.

Moore's musical talent won him an organ scholarship to Magdalen College,
Oxford, where he was tutored by the composer Bernard Rose.[2][3] While
studying music and composition there, he also performed with Alan Bennett in
the Oxford Revue. During his university years, Moore had developed a love of
jazz music and soon became an accomplished jazz pianist and composer. He began
working with such leading musicians as John Dankworth and Cleo Laine.

In 1960 he left Dankworth's band to work on _Beyond the Fringe_.

John Bassett, a graduate of Wadham College, Oxford recommended Moore, his jazz
bandmate and a rising cabaret talent, to producer Robert Ponsonby, who was
putting together a comedy revue entitled _Beyond the Fringe_. Bassett also
chose Jonathan Miller. Moore then recommended Alan Bennett, who in turn
suggested Peter Cook.

_Beyond the Fringe_ was at the forefront of the 1960s UK satire boom, although
the show's original runs in Edinburgh and the provinces in 1960 had had a
lukewarm response. When the revue transferred to the Fortune Theatre in
London, in a revised production by Donald Albery and William Donaldson, it
became a sensation, thanks in some part to a favourable review by Kenneth
Tynan.[4] There were also a number of musical items in the show, using Dudley
Moore's music, most famously an arrangement of the Colonel Bogey March which
resists Moore's repeated attempts to bring it to an end.

In 1962 the show transferred to the John Golden Theatre in New York, with its
original cast. President John F. Kennedy attended a performance on 10 February
1963. The show continued in New York until 1964.

When Moore returned to the UK he was offered his own series on the BBC, _Not
Only... But Also_ (1965, 1966, 1970). It was commissioned specifically as a
vehicle for Moore, but when he invited Peter Cook on as a guest, their comedy
partnership was so notable that it became a permanent fixture of the series.
Cook and Moore are most remembered for their sketches as two working class
men, Pete and Dud, in macs and cloth caps, commenting on politics and the
arts, but they also fashioned a series of one-off characters, usually with
Moore in the role of interviewer to one of Cook's upper-class eccentrics.

The pair developed an unorthodox method for scripting the material, using a
tape recorder to tape an ad-libbed routine that they would then have
transcribed and edited. This would not leave enough time to fully rehearse the
script, so they often had a set of cue cards. Moore was famous for "corpsing"
so as the programmes often went out live Cook would deliberately make him
laugh in order to get an even bigger reaction from the studio audience. The
BBC wiped much of the series, though some of the soundtracks (which were
issued on record) have survived.

In 1968 Cook and Moore briefly switched to ATV for four one-hour programmes
entitled _Goodbye Again_ ; however, they were not as critically well-received
as the BBC shows.

On film, Moore and Cook appeared in the 1966 British comedy film _The Wrong
Box_ , before co-writing and co-starring in _Bedazzled_ (1967)[5] with Eleanor
Bron. The film was directed by Stanley Donen. The pair closed the decade with
appearances in the ensemble caper film _Monte Carlo or Bust_ and Richard
Lester's _The Bed Sitting Room_ , based on the play by Spike Milligan and John
Antrobus.

In 1968 and 1969 Moore embarked on two solo comedy ventures, firstly in the
film _30 Is a Dangerous Age, Cynthia_ and secondly, on stage, for an
Anglicised adaptation of Woody Allen's _Play It Again, Sam_ at the Globe
Theatre in London's West End.

In the 1970s the relationship between Moore and Cook became increasingly
strained as the latter's alcoholism began affecting his work. In 1971,
however, Cook and Moore took sketches from _Not Only....But Also_ and _Goodbye
Again_ , together with new material, to create the stage revue _Behind the
Fridge_. This show toured Australia in 1972 before transferring to New York
City in 1973, re-titled as _Good Evening_. Cook frequently appeared on and off
stage the worse for drink. Nonetheless, the show proved very popular and it
won Tony and Grammy Awards.

When the Broadway run of _Good Evening_ ended, Moore stayed on in the U.S. to
pursue his film acting ambitions in Hollywood, but the pair reunited to host
_Saturday Night Live_ on 24 January 1976 during the SNL first season. They
performed a number of their classic stage routines, including "One Leg Too
Few" and "Frog and Peach", among others, in addition to participating in some
skits with the show's ensemble.

It was during the Broadway run of _Good Evening_ that Cook persuaded Moore to
take the humour of Pete and Dud farther on long-playing records as Derek and
Clive. Chris Blackwell circulated bootleg copies to friends in the music
business and the popularity of the recording convinced Cook to release it
commercially as _Derek and Clive (Live)_ (1976). Two further "Derek and Clive"
albums, _Derek and Clive Come Again_ (1977) and _Derek and Clive Ad Nauseam_
(1978), were later released. The latter was also filmed for a documentary,
_Derek and Clive Get the Horn_. In the film it is clear tensions between the
two men were at a breaking point, with Moore at one point walking out of the
recording room singing, 'Breaking up is so easy to do.' In 2009, it came to
light that, at the time, three separate British police forces had wanted them
to be prosecuted under obscenity laws for their "Derek and Clive" comedy
recordings.

The last significant appearance for the partnership was in 1978's _The Hound
of the Baskervilles_ , where Moore played Dr. Watson to Cook's Sherlock
Holmes, as well as three other roles: in drag; as a one-legged man; and at the
start and end of the film as a flamboyant and mischievous pianist. He also
wrote the film's score. Co-star Terry-Thomas described it as "the most
outrageous film I ever appeared in ... there was no magic ... it was bad!".[6]
The film was not a success critically or financially.

Moore and Cook eventually reunited for the annual American benefit for the
homeless, _Comic Relief_ , in 1987, and again in 1989 for a British audience
at the Amnesty International benefit _The Secret Policeman's Biggest Ball_.

Moore was deeply affected by the death of Cook in 1995, and for weeks would
regularly telephone Cook's home in London, just to hear his friend's voice on
the telephone answering machine. Moore attended Cook's memorial service in
London and, at the time, many people who knew him noted that Moore was
behaving strangely and attributed it to grief or drinking. In November 1995,
Moore teamed up with friend and humorist Martin Lewis in organising a two-day
salute to Cook in Los Angeles that Moore co-hosted with Lewis.

In December 2004 the Channel 4 television station in the United Kingdom
broadcast _Not Only But Always_ , a TV film dramatising the relationship
between Moore and Cook, although the principal focus of the production was on
Cook. Around the same time the relationship between the two was also the
subject of a stage play called _Pete and Dud: Come Again_ by Chris Bartlett
and Nick Awde. For this production Moore is the main subject. Set in a chat-
show studio in the 1980s, it focuses on Moore's comic and personal
relationship with Cook and the directions their careers took after the split
of the partnership.

During the 1960s he formed the Dudley Moore Trio, with drummer Chris Karan and
bassist Pete McGurk. Following McGurk's suicide in June 1968, Peter Morgan
joined the group as his replacement.[7]

Moore's admitted principal musical influences were Oscar Peterson and Erroll
Garner. In an interview he recalled the day he finally mastered Garner's
unique left-hand strum and was so excited that he walked around for several
days with his left hand constantly playing that cadence. His early recordings
included "My Blue Heaven", "Lysie Does It", "Poova Nova", "Take Your Time",
"Indiana", "Sooz Blooz", "Baubles, Bangles & Beads", "Sad One for George" and
"Autumn Leaves". The trio performed regularly on British television, made
numerous recordings and had a long-running residency at Peter Cook's London
nightclub, the Establishment. Amongst other albums, they recorded _The Dudley
Moore Trio_ , _Dudley Moore plays The Theme from Beyond the Fringe and All
That Jazz_ , _The World of Dudley Moore_ , _The Other Side Of Dudley Moore_
and _Genuine Dud_.

Moore was a close friend of record producer Chris Gunning and played piano
(uncredited) on the 1969 single "Broken Hearted Pirates" which Gunning
produced for Simon Dupree and the Big Sound.[8] In 1976 he played piano on
Larry Norman's album _In Another Land_ , in particular on the song _The Sun
Began to Rain_. In 1981 he recorded _Smilin' Through_ with Cleo Laine.

He composed the soundtracks for the films _Bedazzled_ (1967), _30 Is a
Dangerous Age, Cynthia_ (1968), _Inadmissible Evidence_ (1968), _Staircase_
(1969), _The Hound of the Baskervilles_ (1978) and _Six Weeks_ (1982), among
others.

In the late 1970s Moore moved to Hollywood, where he had a supporting role in
the hit film _Foul Play_ (1978) with Goldie Hawn and Chevy Chase. The
following year saw his breakout role in Blake Edwards's _10_ , which became
one of the biggest box-office hits of 1979 and gave him an unprecedented
status as a romantic leading man. Moore followed up with the comedy film
_Wholly Moses!_, which was not a major success.

In 1981 Moore appeared in the title role of the comedy _Arthur_ , an even
bigger hit than _10_. Co-starring Liza Minnelli and Sir John Gielgud, it was
both commercially and critically successful, Moore receiving an Oscar
nomination for Best Actor, whilst Gielgud won the Best Supporting Actor Oscar
for his role as Arthur's stern but compassionate manservant. Moore lost to
Henry Fonda (for _On Golden Pond_ ). He did, however, win a Golden Globe award
for Best Actor in a Musical/Comedy. In the same year, on British television,
Moore was the featured guest subject on _An Audience With..._.

His subsequent films, _Six Weeks_ (1982), _Lovesick_ (1983), _Romantic Comedy_
(1983) and _Unfaithfully Yours_ (1984) were only moderate successes, but he
had another hit in 1984, starring in the Blake Edwards directed _Micki +
Maude_ , co-starring Amy Irving. This won him another Golden Globe for Best
Actor in a Musical/Comedy.

Later films, including _Best Defense_ (1984), _Santa Claus: The Movie_ (1985),
_Like Father Like Son_ (1987), _Arthur 2: On the Rocks_ , a sequel to the
original, _Crazy People_ (1990), _Blame It on the Bellboy_ (1992) and an
animated adaptation of _King Kong_, were inconsistent in terms of both
critical and commercial reception. Moore eventually disowned the _Arthur_
sequel, but, in later years, Cook would wind him up by claiming he preferred
_Arthur 2: On the Rocks_ to _Arthur_.

In 1986 he once again hosted _Saturday Night Live_ , albeit without Peter Cook
this time.

Moore was the subject of the British _This Is Your Life_ —for a second time—in
March 1987 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at his Venice Beach
restaurant; he had previously been honoured by the programme in December 1972.

In addition to acting, Moore continued to work as a composer and pianist,
writing scores for a number of films and giving piano concerts, which were
highlighted by his popular parodies of classical favourites. He also appeared
as Ko-Ko in Jonathan Miller's production of _The Mikado_ in Los Angeles in
March 1988.

In 1991 he released the album _Songs Without Words_ and in 1992 _Live From an
Aircraft Hangar_ , recorded at London's Royal Albert Hall.

He collaborated with the conductor Sir Georg Solti in 1991 to create a Channel
4 television series, _Orchestra!_ , which was designed to introduce audiences
to the symphony orchestra. He later worked with the American conductor Michael
Tilson Thomas on a similar television series, _Concerto!_ (1993), likewise
designed to introduce audiences to classical music concertos.

Moore appeared in two series for CBS, _Dudley_ (1993) and _Daddy's Girls_
(1994); however, both were cancelled before the end of their run.

Moore had been interviewed for _The New York Times_ in 1987 by the music
critic Rena Fruchter, herself an accomplished pianist, and the two became
close friends. By 1995 Moore's film career was on the wane and he was having
trouble remembering his lines, a problem he had never previously encountered.
It was for this reason he was sacked from Barbra Streisand's film _The Mirror
Has Two Faces_.[9] However, his difficulties were, in fact, due to the onset
of the medical condition that eventually led to his death. Opting to
concentrate on the piano, he enlisted Fruchter as an artistic partner. They
performed as a duo in the US and Australia. However, his disease soon started
to make itself apparent there as well, as his fingers would not always do what
he wanted them to do. Further symptoms such as slurred speech and loss of
balance were misinterpreted by the public and the media as a sign of
drunkenness. Moore himself was at a loss to explain this. He moved into
Fruchter's family home in New Jersey and stayed there for five years; however,
this placed a great strain both on her marriage and her friendship with Moore,
and she later set him up in the house next door.

Moore was married and divorced four times: to actresses Suzy Kendall (15 June
1968 – 15 September 1972), Tuesday Weld (20 September 1975 – 18 July 1980; by
whom he had a son in 1976), Brogan Lane (21 February 1988 – 1991), and Nicole
Rothschild (16 April 1994 – 1998; one son, born in 1995).[10][11]

He maintained good relationships with Kendall, Weld and Lane, but expressly
forbade Rothschild to attend his funeral. At the time his illness became
apparent, he was going through a difficult divorce from Rothschild while at
the same time sharing a house in Los Angeles with her and her previous
husband.[10]

Moore dated Susan Anton in the early 1980s, with a lot of talk being made of
their height difference: Moore at 5 feet 2 1⁄2 inches (1.588 m) and Anton at 5
feet 11 inches (1.80 m).

In April 1997, after spending five days in a New York hospital, Moore was
informed that he had calcium deposits in the basal ganglia of his brain and
irreversible frontal lobe damage. In September 1997 he underwent quadruple
heart bypass surgery in London. He also suffered four strokes.[12]

On 30 September 1999, Moore announced that he was suffering from the terminal
degenerative brain disorder progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), a Parkinson
plus syndrome, some of the early symptoms being so similar to intoxication
that he had been reported as being drunk, and that the illness had been
diagnosed earlier in the year.[12]

Moore died on the morning of 27 March 2002[5] as a result of pneumonia,
secondary to immobility caused by the palsy, in Plainfield, New Jersey, at age
66. Rena Fruchter was holding his hand when he died; she reported his final
words were "I can hear the music all around me."[13][14] Moore was interred at
Hillside Cemetery in Scotch Plains, New Jersey. Fruchter later wrote a memoir
of their relationship entitled _Dudley Moore_ (Ebury Press, 2004).

In 1981 Moore won the Golden Globe for Best Actor for his role in _Arthur_ ,
for which he was also Oscar-nominated. In November 2001, Moore was appointed a
Commander of the Order of The British Empire (CBE). Despite his deteriorating
condition, he attended the ceremony at Buckingham Palace on 16 November to
collect his honour in a wheelchair.[9]

