The **East Roman army** refers to the army of the eastern section of the Roman
Empire, from the empire's definitive split in 395 AD to the army's
reorganization by themes after the permanent loss of Syria, Palestine and
Egypt to the Arabs in the 7th century during the Byzantine-Arab Wars. The
_East Roman army_ is the continuation of the Late Roman army of the 4th
century until the Byzantine army of the 7th century onwards.

The East Roman army was a direct continuation of the eastern portion of the
late Roman army, from before the division of the empire. The East Roman army
started with the same basic organization as the late Roman army and its West
Roman counterpart, but between the 5th and 7th centuries, the cavalry grew
more important, the field armies took on more tasks, and the border armies
were transformed into local militias.

In the 6th century, Emperor Justinian I, who reigned from 527 to 565, sent
much of the East Roman army to try to reconquer the former Western Roman
Empire. In these wars, the Eastern Roman Empire reconquered parts of North
Africa from the Vandal Kingdom and Italy from the Ostrogothic Kingdom, as well
as parts of southern Spain. The power of the army diminished in his reign
owing to the Plague of Justinian. In the 7th century, Emperor Heraclius led
the East Roman army against the Sasanian Empire, temporarily regaining Egypt
and Syria, and then against the Rashidun Caliphate. His defeat at the Battle
of Yarmuk would lead to the Islamic conquest of Syria and Egypt, and would
force the reorganization of the East Roman army, leading to the thematic
system of later Byzantine armies.

Much of our evidence for the East Roman army's deployments at the end of the
4th century is contained in a single document, the _Notitia Dignitatum_ ,
compiled c. 395-420, a manual of all late Roman public offices, military and
civil. The main deficiency with the _Notitia_ is that it lacks any personnel
figures so as to render estimates of army size impossible. However, the
_Notitia_ remains the central source on the late Army's structure due to the
dearth of other evidence.

The Strategikon of the Emperor Maurikios, from the end of the 6th century,
describes the cavalry tactics, organization, and equipment of the East Roman
army towards the end of this period.[1] The _De re militari_ of Vegetius,
probably from the beginning of the 5th century, calls for reform of the West
Roman army, which was similar to the east Roman army. However, the _De re
militari_ emphasizes the revival of earlier Roman practices, and does not
provide a clear view of the tactics, organization, and practices of any branch
of the late Roman army.

The histories of Ammianus Marcellinus provide a glimpse of the late Roman army
before the division of the Roman empire. Those of Procopius, especially his
Wars and parts of his Buildings, written while accompanying the magister
militum Belisarius during the emperor Justinian's wars against the Sassanid
empire and the barbarian successor kingdoms, provide a view of the east Roman
army in the period, and its campaigns.[1] The histories of Agathias and
Menander continue those of Procopius.[1]

Another major source for the East Roman army includes the legal codes
published in the East Roman empire in the 5th and 6th centuries: the
Theodosian code (438) and the _Corpus Iuris Civilis_ (528-39). These
compilations of Roman laws dating from the 4th century contain numerous
imperial decrees relating to the regulation and administration of the late
army.

In 395, the death of the last sole Roman emperor, Theodosius I (r. 379-95),
led to the final split of the empire into two political entities, the West (
_Occidentale_ ) and the East ( _Orientale_ ). The system of dual emperors
(called _Augusti_ after the founder of the empire, Augustus) had been
instituted a century earlier by the great reforming emperor Diocletian
(r.284-305). But it had never been envisaged as a political separation, purely
as an administrative and military convenience. Decrees issued by either
emperor were valid in both halves and the successor of each _Augustus_
required the recognition of the other. The empire was reunited under one
emperor under Constantine I, after 324, under Constantius II, after 353, under
Julian, after 361, and Theodosius himself, after 394.

The division into two sections recognized a growing cultural divergence. The
common language of the East had always been Greek, while that of the West was
Latin. This was not _per se_ a significant division, as the empire had long
been a fusion of Greek and Roman cultures (classical civilisation) and the
Roman ruling class was entirely bilingual. But the rise of Christianity
strained that unity, as the cult was always much more widespread in the East
than in the West, which was still largely pagan in 395.[ _citation needed_ ]
Constantine's massive reconstruction of the city of Byzantium into
Constantinople, a second capital to rival Rome, led to the establishment of a
separate eastern court and bureaucracy.

Finally, the political split became complete with the collapse of the Western
empire in the early 5th century and its replacement by a number of barbarian
Germanic kingdoms. The Western army was dissolved and was incorporated into
the barbarian kingdoms.[ _citation needed_ ] The Eastern empire and army, on
the other hand, continued with gradual changes until the Persian and later
Arab invasions in the 7th century. These deprived the East Roman empire of its
dominions in the Middle East and North Africa, especially Egypt.

Warren Treadgold estimates that the east Roman army had about 3,500 _scolae_
or guards, 104,000 field army soldiers, with an uncertain number of sailors,
and 195,500 border army soldiers, again with an uncertain number of sailors,
in 395.[2]

Treadgold also estimates that the east Roman army had about 150,000 field army
soldiers, with an uncertain number of sailors, in 559, late in the period of
Justinian.[3]

Treadgold also estimates that the east Roman army had about 80,000 field army
soldiers, with an uncertain number of sailors, in 641, after the Islamic
conquest of Syria and Egypt.[4]

The size of the Eastern army in 395 is controversial because the size of
individual regiments is not known with any certainty. Plausible estimates of
the size of the whole 4th-century army (excluding fleets) range from c.
400,000[5] to c. 600,000.[6] This would place the Eastern army in the rough
range 200,000 to 300,000, since the army of each division of the empire was
roughly equal.[7]

The higher end of the range is provided by the late 6th-century military
historian Agathias, who gives a global total of 645,000 effectives for the
army "in the old days", presumed to mean when the empire was united.[8] This
figure probably includes fleets, giving a total of c. 600,000 for the army
alone. Agathias is supported by A.H.M. Jones' _Later Roman Empire_ (1964),
which contains the fundamental study of the late Roman army. Jones calculated
a similar total of 600,000 (exc. fleets) by applying his own estimates of unit
strength to the units listed in the _Notitia Dignitatum_.[6] Following Jones,
Treadgold suggests 300,000 for the East in 395.[9]

But there are strong reasons to view 200,000 as more likely:

The discrepancy in army size estimates is mainly due to uncertainty about the
size of _limitanei_ regiments, as can be seen by the wide range of estimates
in the table below. Jones suggests _limitanei_ regiments had a similar size to
Principate auxilia regiments, averaging 500 men each.[12] More recent work,
which includes new archaeological evidence, tends to the view that units were
much smaller, perhaps averaging 250.[10][13]

There is less dispute about _comitatus_ regiments, because of more evidence.
Treadgold estimates the 5 _comitatus_ armies of the East as containing c.
20,000 men each, for a total of c. 100,000, which constitutes either one-third
or one-half of the total army.[9]

About one third of the army units in the _Notitia_ are cavalry, but cavalry
numbers were less than that proportion of the total because cavalry unit sizes
were smaller.[14] The available evidence suggests that the proportion of
cavalry was about one-fifth of the total effectives: in 478, a _comitatus_ of
38,000 men contained 8,000 cavalry (21%).[15]

The later 4th-century army contained three types of army group: (1) Imperial
escort armies ( _comitatus praesentales_ ). These were ordinarily based near
Constantinople, but often accompanied the emperors on campaign. (2) Regional
armies ( _comitatus_ ). These were based in strategic regions, on or near the
frontiers. (3) Border armies ( _exercitus limitanei_ ). These were based on
the frontiers themselves.

The command structure of the Eastern army, as recorded in the _Notitia
Dignitatum_ , is represented diagramatically in the organisation chart
(above).

By the end of the 4th century, there were 2 _comitatus praesentales_ in the
East. They wintered near Constantinople at Nicaea and Nicomedia. Each was
commanded by a _magister militum_ ("master of soldiers", the highest military
rank) Each _magister_ was assisted by a deputy called a _vicarius_.[16]

There were 3 major regional _comitatus_ , also with apparently settled winter
bases: Oriens (based at Antioch), Thraciae (Marcianopolis), Illyricum
(Sirmium) plus two smaller forces in Aegyptus (Alexandria) and Isauria. The
large _comitatus_ were commanded by _magistri_ , the smaller ones by
_comites_. All five reported direct to the eastern _Augustus_. This structure
remained essentially intact until the 6th century.[16]

Units were classified according to whether they were attached to the guard (
_excubitores_ and _scholae_ ), the field armies ( _palatini_ and
_comitatenses_ ) or the border armies ( _limitanei_ ).

The strength of these units is very uncertain and may have varied over the 5th
and 6th centuries. Size may also have varied depending on the status of the
regiment. The table below gives some recent estimates of unit strength, by
unit type and grade:

The overall picture is that _comitatenses_ units were either c. 1,000 or c.
500 strong. _Limitanei_ units would appear to average about 250 effectives.
But much uncertainty remains, especially regarding the size of _limitanei_
regiments, as can be seen by the wide ranges of the size estimates.

The Emperor Leo I created the _Excubitores_ as an elite bodyguard of about 300
soldiers.[18] However, the intrigues and political ambitions of their
commanders (The Counts of the Excubitors, rendered in Latin as _comes
excubitorum_ ) such as Priscus during the reigns of the Emperors Maurice,
Phocas and Heraclius and the Count Valentinus during the reign of Emperor
Constans II, doomed Leo I's formerly famed Isaurian unit to obscurity.

The emperor Constantine I created the _Scholae Palatinae_ as an elite guards
unit of about 6,000 soldiers,[19] and to replace the Praetorian Guard of about
10,000 soldiers.[20] 40 select troops from the _scholae_ , called _candidati_
from their white uniforms, acted as the emperor's personal bodyguards.[21]
Apart from the _Agentes in Rebus_ , the _Scholae_ were originally organized as
cavalry units to accompany the emperors on campaign, although later,
individual members of the _Scholae_ could have non-military missions.[22]
Eventually, Justinian auctioned off positions in what was still a prestigious
ceremonial unit, but no longer a fighting force.[22]

They were outside the normal military chain of command as they did not belong
to the _comitatus praesentales_ and reported to the _magister officiorum_ , a
civilian official.[23] However, this was probably only for administrative
purposes: on campaign, the tribunes commanding each _schola_ probably reported
direct to the emperor himself.

The _Notitia Dignitatum_ lists 7 scolae of cavalry and 1 of agents in the East
Roman empire, as well as 5 of cavalry and 1 of agents in the West Roman
empire.[24]

_Comitatenses_ cavalry units were known as _vexillationes_ , infantry units as
either _legiones_ or _auxilia_.[25] About half the units in the _comitatus_ ,
both cavalry and infantry, were classified as _palatini_. The palatini were
the majority of the _comitatus praesentales_ (80% of regiments) and
constituted a minority of the regional _comitatus_ (14%).[26] The _palatini_
were an elite group with higher status and probably pay.[27]

The majority of cavalry units in the _comitatus_ were traditional melee
formations (61%). These units were denoted _scutarii_ , _stablesiani_ or
_promoti_ , probably honorific titles rather than descriptions of function.
24% of regiments were light cavalry: _equitesDalmatae_, _Mauri_ and
_sagittarii_ (mounted archers). 15% were heavily armoured shock charge
cavalry: _cataphracti_ and _clibanarii_[14]

The limitanei garrisoned fortifications along the borders of the Roman Empire.
They were lower-status and lower-paid than the comitatenses and palatini.[28]
The nature of the limitanei changed considerably between their introduction in
the 3rd or 4th century and their disappearance in the 6th or 7th century. In
the 4th century, the limitanei were professional soldiers,[29][30][31] and
included both infantry and cavalry as well as river flotillas,[24][32] but
after the 5th century they were part-time soldiers,[29] and after the 6th
century they were unpaid militia.[33][34] The role of the limitanei appears to
have included garrisoning frontier fortifications, operating as border guards
and customs police, and preventing small-scale raids.[35][36]

Although the East Roman army sometimes turned to conscription it usually
relied on volunteer soldiers.[37] Shortages of money, rather than of manpower,
usually limited recruitment.[37]

In 395, the army used Latin as its operating language. This continued to be
the case into the late 6th century, despite the fact that Greek was the common
language of the Eastern empire.[38][ _unreliable source?_ ] This was not
simply due to tradition, but also to the fact that about half the Eastern army
continued to be recruited in the Latin-speaking Danubian regions of the
Eastern empire. An analysis of known origins of _comitatenses_ in the period
350-476 shows that in the Eastern army, the Danubian regions provided 54% of
the total sample, despite constituting just 2 of the 7 eastern dioceses
(administrative divisions): Dacia and Thracia.[39] These regions continued to
be the prime recruiting grounds for the East Roman army e.g. the emperor
Justin I (r. 518-27), uncle of Justinian I, was a Latin-speaking peasant who
never learnt to speak more than rudimentary Greek. The Romanized Thracian
(Thraco-Roman) and Illyrian inhabitants of those regions, who came to be known
as Vlachs by foreigners in the Middle Ages, retained the Roman name
(Romanians) and the Latin tongue.[ _citation needed_ ]

The East Roman heavy infantry relied on their spears and shields in close
combat.[40] These weapons were most effective when the soldiers fought in
formation.[41]

The **Strategikon** is the earliest surviving Roman/Byzantine cavalry manual,
and directly influenced later Byzantine military manuals. The Strategikon
describes the organization, equipment, and tactics of the east Roman army at
the end of this period.

The east Roman army included both light and heavy infantry,[42] as well as
light and heavy cavalry.[43][44]

The equipment of the East Roman army changed considerably between the 4th and
7th Centuries. By the end of the period, the cavalry had armor and horse
armor, with both bows and lances as weapons. The heavy infantry still had
armor, with large shields, spears, and swords. The light infantry had bows.

M.C. Bishop and J.C.M. Coulston, in a major work on Roman military equipment,
do not distinguish the equipment of the various branches of the Roman
military.[45] It is doubtful whether there were any universal differences
between the equipment of the palatini, comitatenses, and limitanei.

The late Roman empire had centralized fabricae, introduced by Diocletian, to
provide arms and armor for the army.[45][46][47][48] The introduction of the
centralized fabricae, where earlier armies had relied on legionary workshops,
may reflect the needs of the field armies.[ _citation needed_ ]

The basic equipment of a 4th-century foot soldier was essentially the same as
in the 2nd century: metal armour cuirass, metal helmet, shield and sword.[49]
Some evolution took place during the 3rd century. Trends included the adoption
of warmer clothing; the disappearance of distinctive legionary armour and
weapons; the adoption by the infantry of equipment used by the cavalry in the
earlier period; and the greater use of heavily armoured cavalry called
cataphracts.

According to the _Strategikon_ , the cavalry soldiers should have long "Avar"
tunics reaching past the knees, and large cloaks with sleeves.[50]

According to the _Strategikon_ , the infantry soldiers should have long
"Gothic" tunics reaching the knees, or short ones with split sides, as well as
"Gothic" shoes with thick hobnailed soles, and "Bulgarian" cloaks.[51]

In the 1st and 2nd centuries, a Roman soldier's clothes consisted of a single-
piece, short-sleeved tunic whose hem reached the knees and special hobnailed
sandals ( _caligae_ ). This attire, which left the arms and legs bare, had
evolved in a Mediterranean climate and was not suitable for northern Europe in
cold weather. In northern Europe, long-sleeved tunics, trousers ( _bracae_ ),
socks (worn inside the _caligae_ ) and laced boots were commonly worn in
winter from the 1st century. During the 3rd century, these items of clothing
became much more widespread, apparently common in Mediterranean provinces
also.[52] However, it is likely that in warmer weather, trousers were
dispensed with and _caligae_ worn instead of socks and boots.[53] Late Roman
clothing was often highly decorated, with woven or embroidered strips,
_clavi,_ and circular roundels, _orbiculi,_ added to tunics and cloaks. These
decorative elements usually consisted of geometrical patterns and stylised
plant motifs, but could include human or animal figures.[54] A distinctive
part of a soldier's costume, though it seems to have also been worn by non-
military bureaucrats, was a type of round, brimless hat known as the pannonian
cap ( _pileus pannonicus_ ).[55]

In the 3rd century, troops are depicted wearing mail or scale armour. The
artistic record shows that most late soldiers wore metal armour, despite
Vegetius' statement to the contrary. For example, illustrations in the
_Notitia_ show that the army's _fabricae_ (arms factories) were producing mail
armour at the end of the 4th century.[56] Actual examples of both scale armour
and quite large sections of mail have been recovered, at Trier and Weiler-La-
Tour respectively, within 4th-century contexts.[57] Officers generally seem to
have worn bronze or iron cuirasses, as in the days of the Principate, together
with traditional _pteruges_.[58] The cataphract and _clibanarii_ cavalry, from
limited pictorial evidence and especially from the description of these troops
by Ammianus, seem to have worn specialist forms of armour. In particular their
limbs were protected by laminated defences, made up of curved and overlapping
metal segments: _"Laminarum circuli tenues apti corporis flexibus ambiebant
per omnia membra diducti"_ (Thin circles of iron plates, fitted to the curves
of their bodies, completely covered their limbs).[59]

In general, Roman cavalry helmets had enhanced protection, in the form of
wider cheek-guards and deeper neck-guards, for the sides and back of the head
than infantry helmets. Infantry were less vulnerable in those parts due to
their tighter formation when fighting.[60] During the 3rd century, infantry
helmets tended to adopt the more protective features of cavalry helmets of the
Principate. Cheek-guards could often be fastened together over the chin to
protect the face, and covered the ears save for a slit to permit hearing e.g.
the "Auxiliary E" type or its Niederbieber variant. Cavalry helmets became
even more enclosed e.g. the "Heddernheim" type, which is close to the medieval
great helm, but at the cost much reduced vision and hearing.[61]

In contrast, some infantry helmets in the 4th century reverted to the more
open features of the main Principate type, the "Imperial Gallic". The
"Intercisa" design left the face unobstructed and had ear-holes in the join
between cheek-guards and bowl to allow good hearing. In a radical change from
the earlier single-bowl design, the Intercisa bowl was made of two separate
pieces joined by a riveted ridge in the middle (hence the term "ridge
helmet"). It was simpler and cheaper to manufacture, and therefore probably by
far the most common type, but structurally weaker and therefore offered less
effective protection.[62] The "Berkasovo" type was a more sturdy and
protective ridge helmet. This type of helmet usually has 4 to 6 skull elements
(and the characteristic median ridge), a nasal (nose-guard), a deep brow piece
riveted inside the skull elements and large cheekpieces. This was probably the
cavalry version, as the cheekpieces lack ear-holes. Unusually the helmet
discovered at Burgh Castle, in England, is of the Berkasovo method of
construction, but has cheekpieces with earholes. Face-guards of mail or in the
form of metal 'anthropomorphic masks,' with eye-holes, were often added to the
helmets of the heaviest forms of cavalry, especially _cataphracti_.[63][64]

Despite the apparent cheapness of manufacture of their basic components, many
surviving examples of Late Roman helmets, including the Intercisa type, show
evidence of expensive decoration in the form of silver or silver-gilt
sheathing.[65][66] A possible explanation is that most of the surviving
exemplars may have belonged to officers and that silver- or gold-plating
denoted rank; and, in the case of mounted gemstones, high rank e.g. the ornate
Deurne helmet, believed by some historians to have belonged to a senior
officer.[67] Other academics, in contrast, consider that silver-sheathed
helmets may have been widely worn by _comitatus_ soldiers, given as a form of
pay or reward.[68]

Some East Roman soldiers wore mail or scale hoods for head protection; these
could be part of mail coats or could be separate coifs.[ _dead link_ ][69][70]
Similar armoured hoods appear in an illustration in the Vergilius
Vaticanus.[71]

Shields were both protective equipment for the soldiers and insignia for their
units.[72] Both Vegetius, in De re Militari, and Mauricius, in the
Strategikon, emphasize that each unit should have distinctive shields.[73]

Lance-armed cavalry carried shields, although bow-armed cavalry generally did
not.[74]

All troops adopted the auxiliary oval (or sometimes round) shield ( _clipeus_
).[75] Shields, from examples found at Dura and Nydam, were of vertical plank
construction, the planks glued, and faced inside and out with painted leather.
The edges of the shield were bound with stitched rawhide, which shrank as it
dried improving structural cohesion. It was also lighter than the edging of
copper alloy used in earlier Roman shields.[76]

The East Roman heavy infantry relied on the spear in close combat.[40] No late
Roman or East Roman spear shafts survive, but I.P. Stephenson suggests that
East Roman spears may have been as long as northern European spears discovered
in the bog deposits at Illerup and Nydam, between 2.23 meters and 3.54 meters
long.[77]

The infantry adopted the _spatha_ , a longer (median length: 760 mm/30 in)
sword that during the earlier centuries was used by the cavalry only.[78] In
addition, Vegetius mentions the use of a shorter-bladed sword termed a
_semispatha._[79] At the same time, infantry acquired a heavy thrusting-spear
( _hasta_ ) which became the main close order combat weapon to replace the
_gladius_ , as the _spatha_ was too long to be swung comfortably in tight
formation (although it could be used to stab). These trends imply a greater
emphasis on fighting the enemy "at arm's length".[80]

Short, single-edged knives were also used, although probably as tools rather
than weapons.[81] These appear in 4th-century graves with military belt
fittings,[82] and similar tools appear in 4th through 7th-century
contexts.[83]

In addition to his thrusting-spear, a late foot soldier might also carry a
throwing-spear ( _verutum_ ) or a _spiculum_ , a kind of heavy, long _pilum_ ,
similar to an angon. Alternatively, a couple of short javelins ( _lanceae_ ).
Late infantrymen often carried half a dozen lead-weighted throwing-darts
called _plumbatae_ (from _plumbum_ = "lead"), with an effective range of c. 30
m (98 ft), well beyond that of a javelin. The darts were carried clipped to
the back of the shield.[84] The late foot soldier thus had greater missile
capability than his Principate predecessor, who was usually limited to just
two _pila_.[85] Late Roman archers continued to use the recurved composite bow
as their principal weapon. This was a sophisticated, compact and powerful
weapon, suitable for mounted and foot archers alike (the cavalry version being
more compact than the infantry's). A small number of archers may have been
armed with crossbows ( _manuballistae_ ).[86][ _dubious – discuss_]

In the 6th century, the emperor Justinian I, who reigned from 527 to 565, sent
much of the East Roman army to try to reconquer the former West Roman empire.
In these wars, the East Roman empire reconquered parts of North Africa from
the Vandal kingdom and Italy from the Ostrogothic kingdom, as well as parts of
southern Spain. In the 7th century, the emperor Heraclius led the east Roman
army against the Sassanid empire, temporarily regaining Egypt and Syria, and
then against the Rashidun Caliphate. His defeat at the Battle of Yarmuk would
lead to the Islamic conquest of Syria and Egypt, and would force the
reorganization of the East Roman army, leading to the thematic system of later
Byzantine armies.

