**Electroconvulsive therapy** ( **ECT** ), formerly known as **electroshock
therapy** , is a psychiatric treatment in which seizures are electrically
induced in patients to provide relief from mental disorders.[1] The ECT
procedure was first conducted in 1938[2] and rapidly replaced less safe and
effective forms of biological treatments in use at the time. ECT is often used
with informed consent[3] as a safe and effective intervention for major
depressive disorder, mania, and catatonia.[4] ECT machines were originally
placed in the Class III category by the United States Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) since 1976.[5] They were re-classified as Class II
devices, for treatment of catatonia, major depressive disorder, and bipolar
disorder, in 2018.[6]

A course of ECT is effective for about 50% of people with treatment-resistant
major depressive disorder, whether it is unipolar or bipolar.[7] Follow-up
treatment is still poorly studied, but about half of people who respond
relapse within 12 months.[8] Aside from effects in the brain, the general
physical risks of ECT are similar to those of brief general anesthesia.[9]:259
Immediately following treatment, the most common adverse effects are confusion
and transient memory loss.[4][10] Among treatments for severely depressed
pregnant women, ECT is one of the least harmful to the gestating fetus.[11]

A usual course of ECT involves multiple administrations, typically given two
or three times per week until the patient is no longer suffering symptoms. ECT
is administered under anesthesia with a muscle relaxant.[12] ECT can differ in
its application in three ways: electrode placement, frequency of treatments,
and the electrical waveform of the stimulus. These three forms of application
have significant differences in both adverse side effects and symptom
remission. Placement can be bilateral, in which the electric current is passed
across the whole brain, or unilateral, in which the current is passed across
one hemisphere of the brain. Bilateral placement seems to have greater
efficacy than unilateral, but also carries greater risk of memory
loss.[13][14] After treatment, drug therapy is usually continued, and some
patients receive maintenance ECT.[4]

ECT appears to work in the short term via an anticonvulsant effect mostly in
the frontal lobes, and longer term via neurotrophic effects primarily in the
medial temporal lobe.[15]

ECT is used with informed consent[3] in treatment-resistant major depressive
disorder, treatment-resistant catatonia, prolonged or severe mania, and in
conditions where "there is a need for rapid, definitive response because of
the severity of a psychiatric or medical condition (e.g., when illness is
characterized by stupor, marked psychomotor retardation, depressive delusions
or hallucinations, or life-threatening physical exhaustion associated with
mania)."[4][16]

For major depressive disorder, ECT is generally used only when other
treatments have failed, or in emergencies, such as imminent
suicide.[4][17][18][19] ECT has also been used in selected cases of depression
occurring in the setting of multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease,
Huntington's chorea, developmental delay, brain arteriovenous malformations,
and hydrocephalus.[20]

A meta-analysis on the effectiveness of ECT in unipolar and bipolar depression
was conducted in 2012. Results indicated that although patients with unipolar
depression and bipolar depression responded to other medical treatments very
differently, both groups responded equally well to ECT. Overall remission rate
for patients given a round of ECT treatment was 51.5% for those with unipolar
depression and 50.9% for those with bipolar depression. The severity of each
patient’s depression was assessed at the same baseline in each group.[7]

There is little agreement on the most appropriate follow-up to ECT for people
with major depressive disorder.[8] When ECT is followed by treatment with
antidepressants, about 50% of people relapsed by 12 months following
successful initial treatment with ECT, with about 37% relapsing within the
first 6 months. About twice as many relapsed with no antidepressants. Most of
the evidence for continuation therapy is with tricyclics; evidence for relapse
prevention with newer antidepressants is lacking.[8]

In 2004, a meta-analytic review paper found in terms of efficacy, "a
significant superiority of ECT in all comparisons: ECT versus simulated ECT,
ECT versus placebo, ECT versus antidepressants in general, ECT versus
tricyclics and ECT versus monoamine oxidase inhibitors."[21]

In 2003, The UK ECT Review Group published a systematic review and meta-
analysis comparing ECT to placebo and antidepressant drugs. This meta-analysis
demonstrated a large effect size (high efficacy relative to the mean in terms
of the standard deviation) for ECT versus placebo, and versus antidepressant
drugs.[22]

Compared with transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) for people with
treatment-resistant major depressive disorder, ECT relieves depression about
twice as well, reducing the score on the Hamilton Rating Scale for Depression
by about 15 points, while TMS reduced it by 9 points.[23]

ECT is generally a second-line treatment for people with catatonia who do not
respond to other treatments, but is a first-line treatment for severe or life-
threatening catatonia.[4][24][25] There is a plethora of evidence for its
efficacy, notwithstanding a lack of randomised controlled trials, such that
"the excellent efficacy of ECT in catatonia is generally acknowledged".[24]
For people with autism spectrum disorders who have catatonia, there is little
published evidence about the efficacy of ECT; as of 2014 there were twelve
case reports, and while ECT had "life saving" efficacy in some, results were
mixed and temporary, and maintenance ECT was necessary to sustain benefit.[26]

ECT is used to treat people who have severe or prolonged mania;[4] NICE
recommends it only in life-threatening situations or when other treatments
have failed[27] and as a second-line treatment for bipolar mania.[28][29]

ECT is widely used worldwide in the treatment of schizophrenia, but in North
America and Western Europe it is far less commonly used and invariably only in
treatment-resistant illness when a patient's symptoms show little response to
antipsychotics alone; there is comprehensive research evidence for such
practice.[30] It is useful in the case of severe exacerbations of catatonic
schizophrenia, whether excited or stuporous.[4][27]

Aside from effects in the brain, the general physical risks of ECT are similar
to those of brief general anesthesia; the U.S. Surgeon General's report says
that there are "no absolute health contraindications" to its use.[9]:259
Immediately following treatment, the most common adverse effects are confusion
and memory loss. Some patients experience muscle soreness after ECT. This is
invariably due to the muscle relaxants given during the procedure, rather than
caused by muscle activity. ECT does not lead to brain damage.[31] The death
rate during ECT is around 4 per 100,000 procedures.[32] There is evidence and
rationale to support giving low doses of benzodiazepines or otherwise low
doses of general anesthetics, which induce sedation but not anesthesia, to
patients to reduce adverse effects of ECT.[33]

While there are no absolute contraindications for ECT, there is increased risk
for patients who have unstable or severe cardiovascular conditions or
aneurysms; who have recently had a stroke; who have increased intracranial
pressure (for instance, due to a solid brain tumor), or who have severe
pulmonary conditions, or who are generally at high risk for receiving
anesthesia.[10]:30

In adolescents, ECT is highly efficient for several psychiatric disorders,
with few and relatively benign adverse effects.[34] In one British patient
survey, 80% said they would readily have the treatment again, including most
of the 11 patients who had found aspects of the treatment frightening.[35]

Cognitive impairment is sometimes noticed after ECT.[36][37][38][39] While it
has been claimed by some non-medical authors that retrograde amnesia occurs to
some extent in almost all patients receiving ECT,[14] most experts consider
this adverse effect relatively uncommon.[40] The American Psychiatric
Association (APA) report in 2001 acknowledges: “In some patients the recovery
from retrograde amnesia will be incomplete, and evidence has shown that ECT
can result in persistent or permanent memory loss”.[10] It is the purported
effects of ECT on long-term memory that give rise to much of the concern
surrounding its use.[41] However, the methods used to measure memory loss are
generally poor, and their application to people with depression, who have
cognitive deficits including problems with memory, have been problematic.[40]

The acute effects of ECT can include amnesia, both retrograde (for events
occurring before the treatment) and anterograde (for events occurring after
the treatment).[42] Memory loss and confusion are more pronounced with
bilateral electrode placement rather than unilateral, and with outdated sine-
wave rather than brief-pulse currents. The use of either constant or pulsing
electrical impulses also varied the memory loss results in patients. Patients
who received pulsing electrical impulses, as opposed to a steady flow, seemed
to incur less memory loss. The vast majority of modern treatment uses brief
pulse currents.[42]

Retrograde amnesia is most marked for events occurring in the weeks or months
before treatment, with one study showing that although some people lose
memories from years prior to treatment, recovery of such memories was
"virtually complete" by seven months post-treatment, with the only enduring
loss being memories in the weeks and months prior to the treatment.[43][44]
Anterograde memory loss is usually limited to the time of treatment itself or
shortly afterwards. In the weeks and months following ECT these memory
problems gradually improve, but some people have persistent losses, especially
with bilateral ECT.[1][42] One published review summarizing the results of
questionnaires about subjective memory loss found that between 29% and 55% of
respondents believed they experienced long-lasting or permanent memory
changes.[45] In 2000, American psychiatrist Sarah Lisanby and colleagues found
that bilateral ECT left patients with more persistently impaired memory of
public events as compared to right unilateral ECT.[41]

Considerable controversy exists over the effects of ECT on brain tissue,
although a number of mental health associations—including the APA—have
concluded that there is no evidence that ECT causes structural brain
damage.[10][18] A 1999 report by the U.S. Surgeon General states: "The fears
that ECT causes gross structural brain pathology have not been supported by
decades of methodologically sound research in both humans and animals."[46]

Many expert proponents of ECT maintain that the procedure is safe and does not
cause brain damage. Dr. Charles Kellner, a prominent ECT researcher and former
chief editor of the _Journal of ECT_ , stated in a 2007 interview that, "There
are a number of well-designed studies that show ECT does not cause brain
damage and numerous reports of patients who have received a large number of
treatments over their lifetime and have suffered no significant problems due
to ECT."[47] Dr. Kellner cites a study purporting to show an absence of
cognitive impairment in eight subjects after more than 100 lifetime ECT
treatments.[48] Dr. Kellner stated "Rather than cause brain damage, there is
evidence that ECT may reverse some of the damaging effects of serious
psychiatric illness."

If steps are taken to decrease potential risks, ECT is generally accepted to
be relatively safe during all trimesters of pregnancy, particularly when
compared to pharmacological treatments.[11][49] Suggested preparation for ECT
during pregnancy includes a pelvic examination, discontinuation of
nonessential anticholinergic medication, uterine tocodynamometry, intravenous
hydration, and administration of a nonparticulate antacid. During ECT,
elevation of the pregnant woman's right hip, external fetal cardiac
monitoring, intubation, and avoidance of excessive hyperventilation are
recommended.[11] In many instances of active mood disorder during pregnancy,
the risks of untreated symptoms may outweigh the risks of ECT. Potential
complications of ECT during pregnancy can be minimized by modifications in
technique. The use of ECT during pregnancy requires thorough evaluation of the
patient’s capacity for informed consent.[50]

ECT can cause a lack of blood flow and oxygen to the heart, heart arrhythmia,
and "persistent asystole."[51] One study found that asystole of two or more
seconds was observed in just under 50% of patients, but in all such cases the
heartbeat returned without any intervention.[52] In another study, geriatric
patients experienced brief asystole at a rate of 65.8%, but once again no
significant complications arose as a result.[53] In fact, the same study
concluded that patients with prior cardiovascular diagnoses were actually
"less likely to experience asystole than younger, healthier patients."[54]
Although heart failure is exceedingly rare as a complication of ECT, it can
occur, and deaths during ECT are usually due to cardiovascular
complications.[55][56][57]

ECT requires the informed consent of the patient.[1]:1880[3][4]

Whether psychiatric medications are terminated prior to treatment or
maintained, varies.[1]:1885[58] However, drugs that are known to cause
toxicity in combination with ECT, such as lithium, are discontinued, and
benzodiazepines, which increase the seizure threshold,[59] are either
discontinued, a benzodiazepine antagonist is administered at each ECT session,
or the ECT treatment is adjusted accordingly.[1]:1879:1875

The placement of electrodes, as well as the dose and duration of the
stimulation is determined on a per-patient basis.[1]:1881

In unilateral ECT, both electrodes are placed on the same side of the
patient's head. Unilateral ECT may be used first to minimize side effects such
as memory loss.

In bilateral ECT, the two electrodes are placed on opposite sides of the head.
Usually bitemporal placement is used, whereby the electrodes are placed on the
temples. Uncommonly bifrontal placement in used; this involves positioning the
electrodes on the patient's forehead, roughly above each eye.

Unilateral ECT is thought to cause fewer cognitive effects than bilateral
treatment, but is less effective unless administered at higher doses.[1]:1881
Most patients in the US[60] and almost all in the UK[13][61][62] receive
bilateral ECT.

The electrodes deliver an electrical stimulus. The stimulus levels recommended
for ECT are in excess of an individual's seizure threshold: about one and a
half times seizure threshold for bilateral ECT and up to 12 times for
unilateral ECT.[1]:1881 Below these levels treatment may not be effective in
spite of a seizure, while doses massively above threshold level, especially
with bilateral ECT, expose patients to the risk of more severe cognitive
impairment without additional therapeutic gains.[63] Seizure threshold is
determined by trial and error ("dose titration"). Some psychiatrists use dose
titration, some still use "fixed dose" (that is, all patients are given the
same dose) and others compromise by roughly estimating a patient's threshold
according to age and sex.[60] Older men tend to have higher thresholds than
younger women, but it is not a hard and fast rule, and other factors, for
example drugs, affect seizure threshold.

Immediately prior to treatment, a patient is given a short-acting anesthetic
such as methohexital, etomidate, or thiopental,[1] a muscle relaxant such as
suxamethonium (succinylcholine), and occasionally atropine to inhibit
salivation.[1]:1882 In a minority of countries such as Japan,[64] India,[65]
and Nigeria,[66] ECT may be used without anesthesia. The Union Health Ministry
of India recommended a ban on ECT without anesthesia in India's Mental Health
Care Bill of 2010 and the Mental Health Care Bill of 2013.[67][68] The
practice was abolished in Turkey's largest psychiatric hospital in 2008.[69]

The patient's EEG, ECG, and blood oxygen levels are monitored during
treatment.[1]:1882

ECT is usually administered three times a week, on alternate days, over a
course of two to four weeks.[1]:1882–1883

Most modern ECT devices deliver a brief-pulse current, which is thought to
cause fewer cognitive effects than the sine-wave currents which were
originally used in ECT.[1] A small minority of psychiatrists in the US still
use sine-wave stimuli.[60] Sine-wave is no longer used in the UK or
Ireland.[62] Typically, the electrical stimulus used in ECT is about 800
milliamps and has up to several hundred watts, and the current flows for
between one and 6 seconds.[63]

In the US, ECT devices are manufactured by two companies, Somatics, which is
owned by psychiatrists Richard Abrams and Conrad Swartz, and Mecta.[70] In the
UK, the market for ECT devices was long monopolized by Ectron Ltd, which was
set up by psychiatrist Robert Russell.[71]

Despite decades of research, the exact mechanism of action of ECT remains
elusive. Neuroimaging studies in people who have had ECT, investigating
differences between responders and nonresponders, and people who relapse, find
that responders have anticonvulsant effects mostly in the frontal lobes, which
corresponds to immediate responses, and neurotrophic effects primarily in the
medial temporal lobe. The anticonvulsant effects are decreased blood flow and
decreased metabolism, while the neurotrophic effects are opposite - increased
perfusion and metabolism, as well as increased volume of the hippocampus.[15]

As of 2001, it was estimated that about one million people received ECT
annually.[72]

There is wide variation in ECT use between different countries, different
hospitals, and different psychiatrists.[1][72] International practice varies
considerably from widespread use of the therapy in many Western countries to a
small minority of countries that do not use ECT at all, such as Slovenia.[73]

About 70 percent of ECT patients are women.[1] This may be due to the fact
that women are more likely to be diagnosed with depression.[1][74] Older and
more affluent patients are also more likely to receive ECT. The use of ECT is
not as common in ethnic minorities.[74][75]

Sarah Hall reports, "ECT has been dogged by conflict between psychiatrists who
swear by it, and some patients and families of patients who say that their
lives have been ruined by it. It is controversial in some European countries
such as the Netherlands and Italy, where its use is severely restricted".[76]

ECT became popular in the US in the 1940s. At the time, psychiatric hospitals
were overrun with patients whom doctors were desperate to treat and cure.
Whereas lobotomies would reduce a patient to a more manageable submissive
state, ECT helped to improve mood in those with severe depression. A survey of
psychiatric practice in the late 1980s found that an estimated 100,000 people
received ECT annually, with wide variation between metropolitan statistical
areas.[77] Accurate statistics about the frequency, context and circumstances
of ECT in the US are difficult to obtain because only a few states have
reporting laws that require the treating facility to supply state authorities
with this information.[78] In 13 of the 50 states, the practice of ECT is
regulated by law.[79] In the mid-1990s in Texas, ECT was used in about one
third of psychiatric facilities and given to about 1,650 people annually.[74]
Usage of ECT has since declined slightly; in 2000–01 ECT was given to about
1500 people aged from 16 to 97 (in Texas it is illegal to give ECT to anyone
under sixteen).[80] ECT is more commonly used in private psychiatric hospitals
than in public hospitals, and minority patients are underrepresented in the
ECT statistics.[1] In the United States, ECT is usually given three times a
week; in the United Kingdom, it is usually given twice a week.[1] Occasionally
it is given on a daily basis.[1] A course usually consists of 6–12 treatments,
but may be more or fewer. Following a course of ECT some patients may be given
continuation or maintenance ECT with further treatments at weekly, fortnightly
or monthly intervals.[1] A few psychiatrists in the US use multiple-monitored
ECT (MMECT), where patients receive more than one treatment per anesthetic.[1]
Electroconvulsive therapy is not a required subject in US medical schools and
not a required skill in psychiatric residency training. Privileging for ECT
practice at institutions is a local option: no national certification
standards are established, and no ECT-specific continuing training experiences
are required of ECT practitioners.[81]

In the UK in 1980, an estimated 50,000 people received ECT annually, with use
declining steadily since then[82] to about 12,000 per annum in 2002.[83] It is
still used in nearly all psychiatric hospitals, with a survey of ECT use from
2002 finding that 71 percent of patients were women and 46 percent were over
65 years of age. Eighty-one percent had a diagnosis of mood disorder;
schizophrenia was the next most common diagnosis. Sixteen percent were treated
without their consent.[83] In 2003, the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence, a government body which was set up to standardize treatment
throughout the National Health Service in England and Wales, issued guidance
on the use of ECT. Its use was recommended "only to achieve rapid and short-
term improvement of severe symptoms after an adequate trial of treatment
options has proven ineffective and/or when the condition is considered to be
potentially life-threatening in individuals with severe depressive illness,
catatonia or a prolonged manic episode".[84]

The guidance received a mixed reception. It was welcomed by an editorial in
the _British Medical Journal_[85] but the Royal College of Psychiatrists
launched an unsuccessful appeal.[86] The NICE guidance, as the _British
Medical Journal_ editorial points out, is only a policy statement and
psychiatrists may deviate from it if they see fit. Adherence to standards has
not been universal in the past. A survey of ECT use in 1980 found that more
than half of ECT clinics failed to meet minimum standards set by the Royal
College of Psychiatrists, with a later survey in 1998 finding that minimum
standards were largely adhered to, but that two-thirds of clinics still fell
short of current guidelines, particularly in the training and supervision of
junior doctors involved in the procedure.[87] A voluntary accreditation
scheme, ECTAS, was set up in 2004 by the Royal College, and as of 2017 the
vast majority of ECT clinics in England, Wales, Northern Ireland and the
Republic of Ireland have signed up.[88]

The Mental Health Act 2007 allows people to be treated against their will.
This law has extra protections regarding ECT. A patient capable of making the
decision can decline the treatment, and in that case treatment cannot be given
unless it will save that patient's life or is immediately necessary to prevent
deterioration of the patient's condition. A patient may not be capable of
making the decision (they "lack capacity"), and in that situation ECT can be
given if it is appropriate and also if there are no advance directives that
prevent the use of ECT.[89]

ECT was introduced in China in the early 1950s and while it was originally
practiced without anesthesia, as of 2012 almost all procedures were conducted
with it. As of 2012, there are approximately 400 ECT machines in China, and
150,000 ECT treatments are performed each year.[90] Chinese national practice
guidelines recommend ECT for the treatment of schizophrenia, depressive
disorders, and bipolar disorder and in the Chinese literature, ECT is an
effective treatment for schizophrenia and mood disorders.[90] Although the
Chinese government stopped classifying homosexuality as an illness in 2001,
electroconvulsive therapy is still used by some establishments as a form of
"conversion therapy".[91][92]

As early as the 16th century, agents to induce seizures were used to treat
psychiatric conditions. In 1785, the therapeutic use of seizure induction was
documented in the _London Medical and Surgical Journal_.[1][93][94] As to its
earliest antecedents one doctor claims 1744 as the dawn of electricity's
therapeutic use, as documented in the first issue of _Electricity and
Medicine_. Treatment and cure of hysterical blindness was documented eleven
years later. Benjamin Franklin wrote that an electrostatic machine cured "a
woman of hysterical fits." In 1801, Giovanni Aldini used galvanism to treat
patients suffering from various mental disorders.[95] G.B.C. Duchenne, the
mid-19th century "Father of Electrotherapy", said its use was integral to a
neurological practice.[96]

In the second half of the 19th century, such efforts were frequent enough in
British asylums as to make it notable.[97]

Convulsive therapy was introduced in 1934 by Hungarian neuropsychiatrist
Ladislas J. Meduna who, believing mistakenly that schizophrenia and epilepsy
were antagonistic disorders, induced seizures first with camphor and then
metrazol (cardiazol).[98][99] Meduna is thought to be the father of convulsive
therapy.[100] In 1937, the first international meeting on convulsive therapy
was held in Switzerland by the Swiss psychiatrist Muller. The proceedings were
published in the _American Journal of Psychiatry_ and, within three years,
cardiazol convulsive therapy was being used worldwide.[99] Italian Professor
of neuropsychiatry Ugo Cerletti, who had been using electric shocks to produce
seizures in animal experiments, and his colleague Lucio Bini developed the
idea of using electricity as a substitute for metrazol in convulsive therapy
and, in 1938, experimented for the first time on a person. It was believed
early on that inducing convulsions aided in helping those with severe
schizophrenia but later found to be most useful with affective disorders such
as depression. Cerletti had noted a shock to the head produced convulsions in
dogs. The idea to use electroshock on humans came to Cerletti when he saw how
pigs were given an electric shock before being butchered to put them in an
anesthetized state.[101] Cerletti and Bini practiced until they felt they had
the right parameters needed to have a successful human trial. Once they
started trials on patients, they found that after 10-20 treatments the results
were significant. Patients had much improved. A positive side effect to the
treatment was retrograde amnesia. It was because of this side effect that
patients could not remember the treatments and had no ill feelings toward
it.[101] ECT soon replaced metrazol therapy all over the world because it was
cheaper, less frightening and more convenient.[102] Cerletti and Bini were
nominated for a Nobel Prize but did not receive one. By 1940, the procedure
was introduced to both England and the US. In Germany and Austria, it was
promoted by Friedrich Meggendorfer. Through the 1940s and 1950s, the use of
ECT became widespread.

In the early 1940s, in an attempt to reduce the memory disturbance and
confusion associated with treatment, two modifications were introduced: the
use of unilateral electrode placement and the replacement of sinusoidal
current with brief pulse. It took many years for brief-pulse equipment to be
widely adopted.[103] In the 1940s and early 1950s ECT, was usually given in
"unmodified" form, without muscle relaxants, and the seizure resulted in a
full-scale convulsion. A rare but serious complication of unmodified ECT was
fracture or dislocation of the long bones. In the 1940s, psychiatrists began
to experiment with curare, the muscle-paralysing South American poison, in
order to modify the convulsions. The introduction of suxamethonium
(succinylcholine), a safer synthetic alternative to curare, in 1951 led to the
more widespread use of "modified" ECT. A short-acting anesthetic was usually
given in addition to the muscle relaxant in order to spare patients the
terrifying feeling of suffocation that can be experienced with muscle
relaxants.[103]

The steady growth of antidepressant use along with negative depictions of ECT
in the mass media led to a marked decline in the use of ECT during the 1950s
to the 1970s. The Surgeon General stated there were problems with electroshock
therapy in the initial years before anesthesia was routinely given, and that
"these now-antiquated practices contributed to the negative portrayal of ECT
in the popular media."[104] _The New York Times_ described the public's
negative perception of ECT as being caused mainly by one movie: "For Big Nurse
in _One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest,_ it was a tool of terror, and, in the
public mind, _shock therapy_ has retained the tarnished image given it by Ken
Kesey's novel: dangerous, inhumane and overused".[105]

In 1976, Dr. Blatchley demonstrated the effectiveness of his constant current,
brief pulse device ECT. This device eventually largely replaced earlier
devices because of the reduction in cognitive side effects, although as of
2012 some ECT clinics still were using sine-wave devices.[72] The 1970s saw
the publication of the first American Psychiatric Association (APA) task force
report on electroconvulsive therapy (to be followed by further reports in 1990
and 2001). The report endorsed the use of ECT in the treatment of depression.
The decade also saw criticism of ECT.[106] Specifically, critics pointed to
shortcomings such as noted side effects, the procedure being used as a form of
abuse, and uneven application of ECT. The use of ECT declined until the 1980s,
"when use began to increase amid growing awareness of its benefits and cost-
effectiveness for treating severe depression".[104] In 1985, the National
Institute of Mental Health and National Institutes of Health convened a
consensus development conference on ECT and concluded that, while ECT was the
most controversial treatment in psychiatry and had significant side-effects,
it had been shown to be effective for a narrow range of severe psychiatric
disorders.[107]

Because of the backlash noted previously, national institutions reviewed past
practices and set new standards. In 1978, the American Psychiatric Association
released its first task force report in which new standards for consent were
introduced and the use of unilateral electrode placement was recommended. The
1985 NIMH Consensus Conference confirmed the therapeutic role of ECT in
certain circumstances. The American Psychiatric Association released its
second task force report in 1990 where specific details on the delivery,
education, and training of ECT were documented. Finally, in 2001 the American
Psychiatric Association released its latest task force report.[10] This report
emphasizes the importance of informed consent, and the expanded role that the
procedure has in modern medicine. By 2017, ECT was routinely covered by
insurance companies for providing the "biggest bang for the buck" for
otherwise intractable cases of severe mental illness, was receiving favorable
media coverage, and was being provided in regional medical centers.[108]

Surveys of public opinion, the testimony of former patients, legal
restrictions on the use of ECT and disputes as to the efficacy, ethics and
adverse effects of ECT within the psychiatric and wider medical community
indicate that the use of ECT remains
controversial.[109][110][111][112][113][114][115] This is reflected in the
January 2011 vote by the FDA's Neurological Devices Advisory Panel to
recommend that FDA maintain ECT devices in the Class III device category for
high risk devices, except for patients suffering from catatonia, major
depressive disorder, and bipolar disorder.[6] This may result in the
manufacturers of such devices having to do controlled trials on their safety
and efficacy for the first time.[4][116][117] In justifying their position,
panelists referred to the memory loss associated with ECT and the lack of
long-term data.[118]

The World Health Organization (2005) advises that ECT should be used only with
the informed consent of the patient (or their guardian if their incapacity to
consent has been established).[16]

In the US, this doctrine places a legal obligation on a doctor to make a
patient aware of the reason for treatment, the risks and benefits of a
proposed treatment, the risks and benefits of alternative treatment, and the
risks and benefits of receiving no treatment. The patient is then given the
opportunity to accept or reject the treatment. The form states how many
treatments are recommended and also makes the patient aware that consent may
be revoked and treatment discontinued at any time during a course of ECT.[9]
The US Surgeon General's Report on Mental Health states that patients should
be warned that the benefits of ECT are short-lived without active continuation
treatment in the form of drugs or further ECT, and that there may be some risk
of permanent, severe memory loss after ECT.[9] The report advises
psychiatrists to involve patients in discussion, possibly with the aid of
leaflets or videos, both before and during a course of ECT.

To demonstrate what he believes should be required to fully satisfy the legal
obligation for informed consent, one psychiatrist, working for an anti-
psychiatry organisation, has formulated his own consent form[119] using the
consent form developed and enacted by the Texas Legislature[120] as a model.

According to the US Surgeon General, involuntary treatment is uncommon in the
US and is typically used only in cases of great extremity, and only when all
other treatment options have been exhausted. The use of ECT is believed to be
a potentially life-saving treatment.[46]

In one of the few jurisdictions where recent statistics on ECT usage are
available, a national audit of ECT by the Scottish ECT Accreditation Network
indicated that 77% of patients who received the treatment in 2008 were capable
of giving informed consent.[121]

In the UK, in order for consent to be valid it requires an explanation in
"broad terms" of the nature of the procedure and its likely effects.[122] One
review from 2005 found that only about half of patients felt they were given
sufficient information about ECT and its adverse effects[123] and another
survey found that about fifty percent of psychiatrists and nurses agreed with
them.[124]

A 2005 study published in the _British Journal of Psychiatry_ described
patients' perspectives on the adequacy of informed consent before ECT.[123]
The study found that "About half (45–55%) of patients reported they were given
an adequate explanation of ECT, implying a similar percentage felt they were
not." The authors also stated:

Approximately a third did not feel they had freely consented to ECT even when
they had signed a consent form. The proportion who feel they did not freely
choose the treatment has actually increased over time. The same themes arise
whether the patient had received treatment a year ago or 30 years ago. Neither
current nor proposed safeguards for patients are sufficient to ensure informed
consent with respect to ECT, at least in England and Wales.[123]

Procedures for involuntary ECT vary from country to country depending on local
mental health laws.

In the US, ECT devices came into existence prior to medical devices being
regulated by the Food and Drug Administration; when the law came into effect
the FDA was obligated to retrospectively review already existing devices and
classify them, and determine whether clinical trials were needed to prove
efficacy and safety. While the FDA has classified the devices used to
administer ECT as Class III medical devices, as of 2011 the FDA had not yet
determined whether the devices should be withdrawn from the market until
clinical trials prove their safety and efficacy.[4]:5[116][117] The FDA
considers ECT machinery to be experimental devices.[125] In most states in the
US, a judicial order following a formal hearing is needed before a patient can
be forced to undergo involuntary ECT.[9] However, ECT can also be
involuntarily administered in situations with less immediate danger. Suicidal
intent is a common justification for its involuntary use, especially when
other treatments are ineffective.[9]

Until 2007 in England and Wales, the Mental Health Act 1983 allowed the use of
ECT on detained patients whether or not they had capacity to consent to it.
However, following amendments which took effect in 2007, ECT may not generally
be given to a patient who has capacity and refuses it, irrespective of his or
her detention under the Act.[126] In fact, even if a patient is deemed to lack
capacity, if they made a valid advance decision refusing ECT then they should
not be given it; and even if they do not have an advance decision, the
psychiatrist must obtain an independent second opinion (which is also the case
if the patient is under age of consent).[127] However, there is an exception
regardless of consent and capacity; under Section 62 of the Act, if the
treating psychiatrist says the need for treatment is urgent they may start a
course of ECT without authorization.[128] From 2003 to 2005, about 2,000
people a year in England and Wales were treated without their consent under
the Mental Health Act.[129] Concerns have been raised by the official
regulator that psychiatrists are too readily assuming that patients have the
capacity to consent to their treatments, and that there is a worrying lack of
independent advocacy.[130] In Scotland, the Mental Health (Care and Treatment)
(Scotland) Act 2003 also gives patients with capacity the right to refuse
ECT.[131]

A questionnaire survey of 379 members of the general public in Australia
indicated that more than 60% of respondents had some knowledge about the main
aspects of ECT. Participants were generally opposed to the use of ECT on
depressed individuals with psychosocial issues, on children, and on
involuntary patients. Public perceptions of ECT were found to be mainly
negative.[115]

Ernest Hemingway, an American author, died by suicide shortly after ECT at the
Mayo Clinic in 1961. He is reported to have said to his biographer, "Well,
what is the sense of ruining my head and erasing my memory, which is my
capital, and putting me out of business? It was a brilliant cure but we lost
the patient...."[132] Robert Pirsig suffered a nervous breakdown and spent
time in and out of psychiatric hospitals between 1961 and 1963. He was
diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and clinical depression as a result of
an evaluation conducted by psychoanalysts, and was treated with
electroconvulsive therapy on numerous occasions, a treatment he discusses in
his novel, _Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance_.

American surgeon and award-winning author Sherwin B. Nuland is another notable
person who has undergone ECT.[133] In his 40s, this successful surgeon's
depression became so severe that he had to be institutionalized. After
exhausting all treatment options, a young resident assigned to his case
suggested ECT, which ended up being successful.[134] Author David Foster
Wallace also received ECT for many years, beginning as a teenager, before his
suicide at age 46.[135]

Award-winning New Zealand author Janet Frame had ECT. She later wrote about
this in her novel Faces in the Water.[ _citation needed_ ]

Electroconvulsive therapy has been depicted in fiction, including fictional
works partly based on true experiences. These include Sylvia Plath's
autobiographical novel, _The Bell Jar_ , Ken Loach's film Family Life, and Ken
Kesey's novel _One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest_ ; Kesey's novel is a direct
product of his time working the graveyard shift as an orderly at a mental
health facility in Menlo Park, California.[136][137]

In the 2000 film _Requiem for a Dream_ , Sarah Goldfarb receives "unmodified"
electroconvulsive therapy after experiencing severe amphetamine psychosis
following prolonged stimulant abuse. In the 2014 TV series _Constantine_ , the
protagonist John Constantine is institutionalized and specifically requests
electroconvulsive therapy as an attempt to alleviate or resolve his mental
problems.

The musical _Next to Normal_ centers around the family of a woman who
undergoes the procedure.

In the HBO series _Six Feet Under_ season 5, George undergoes an ECT treatment
to deal with his increasing paranoia. The depiction is shown realistically,
with an actual ECT machine.

In the WB/CW TV series _Smallville_ , Lionel Luthor condemns his son Lex
Luthor to electroshock therapy to remove Lex's short-term memory of a murder
he discovered Lionel committed.

Throughout the history of ECT, women have received it two to three times as
often as men.[138] Currently, about 70 percent of ECT patients are women.[1]
This may be due to the fact that women are more likely to be diagnosed with
depression.[1][74] A 1974 study of ECT in Massachusetts reported that women
made up 69 percent of those given ECT.[139] The Ministry of Health in Canada
reported that from 1999 until 2000 in the province of Ontario, women were 71
percent of those given ECT in provincial psychiatric institutions, and 75
percent of the total ECT given was given to women.[140]

ECT treatment of severely autistic children with violent, sometimes self-
harming behaviour first began in parts of the US during the early years of
21st century. Each session reportedly alleviates symptoms for up to 10 days at
a time, but it is not claimed as a cure. One practitioner, Charles Kellner,
ECT director at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, is so convinced ECT is
effective and safe that he allowed a parent to witness a procedure and the BBC
to record the intervention.[141]

Though ECT use declined with the advent of modern antidepressants, there has
been a resurgence of ECT with new modern technologies, techniques and lower
side effect profile.[142] Modern shock voltage is given for a shorter duration
of 0.5 milliseconds where conventional brief pulse is 1.5 milliseconds.[143]
It may be the most effective short-term treatment of depression.[21][22] The
1975 film _One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest_ has convinced viewers that ECT is
a horrific procedure which only results in the patient's complete memory loss.
In the last decade, physicians and patients have returned to using ECT to
treat various mental illnesses including depression and bipolar disorder. In
2014, the American Psychiatric Association launched a petition to reclassify
ECT as a low-risk treatment.[144]

