**Elliot Norton** (17 May 1903 â€“ 20 July 2003) was a Boston-based theater
critic who was one of the most influential regional theater critics in his
48-year-long career, during which he who wrote 6,000 reviews and became known
as "The Dean of American Theatre Critics".[1][2] Norton practiced a style of
criticism known as "play doctoring", where he made suggestions on how to
improve a show. Boston was a major pre-Broadway tryout town, and Elliot's
criticism was taken seriously by producers, directors and playwrights,
including Joshua Logan, Mike Nichols, and Neil Simon.[1]

Norton was called "the most valuable critic in America" by producer Alexander
Cohen.[3] According to Logan:

Elliot had an absolute dead eye for a play. He could see it once and form an
opinion that struck at the very core. He was very helpful to me on every show
I brought to Boston. He had a gentlemanly manner, and even if what he had to
say was rough, he could tell you without breaking your heart.[3]

Born William Elliot Norton in Boston to William L. Norton and Mary
(Fitzgerald) Norton, he attended Harvard College (Class of 1926) after
graduating from the Boston Latin School.[3] At Harvard College, he took George
Pierce Baker's class for dramatists.[1] Baker's most famous student was Eugene
O'Neill, whose plays were revolutionizing Broadway theater at the time Norton
became a drama critic.

Norton began his career as a newspaperman with the _Boston Post_ after
graduating from Harvard in 1926. By 1934, he was promoted from reporter to the
editor of the drama section, where he began to make his name as a critic. The
_Post_ went out of business in 1956, and Norton was hired by the Boston Record
American, which evolved into the _Boston Herald American_ , which eventually
became the _Boston Herald_ after he retired in 1982.[1]

In addition to his newspaper reviews, he was a television critic on Boston
television, including public TV station WGBH, where he hosted _Elliot Norton
Reviews_.[1] The show ran for 1,100 episodes from 1958 to 1982.

Norton practiced drama criticism when the relationship between the regional
critic and playwrights whose shows were undergoing tryouts in their towns were
not as adversarial as they were to become. Frank Rich, who became prominent as
a theater critic for _The New York Times_ , wrote about how Norton's role as a
"play doctor" was part of its times:

What people should remember was that in his heyday ... the Josh Logans and
Rodgers and Hammersteins looked to out-of-town critics for informed advice
about how to `fix their shows.' Critics like Norton relished playing the role.
They went back to see plays at the end of the run and that was just the way
the Broadway theater worked. Newspapers and audiences accepted it as part of
the process as critics would write columns that combined repertorial,
critical, and advice-giving elements. It would be considered highly
inappropriate today to talk to the writers and producers outside of columns,
but it was a different world.[3]

Two major theatrical successes that Norton was credited with midwifing while
they were in their Boston tryouts were _Oklahoma!_ and _The Odd Couple_.

Norton helped shape the first collaboration between Richard Rodgers and Oscar
Hammerstein II during the tryout of as _Away We Go_ at Boston's Colonial
Theatre. Norton provided input by his printed criticism and informally.
Retitled _Oklahoma!_ when it opened on Broadway, the musical not only was a
smash but helped change the face of American musical theater.[4]

Neil Simon said that Norton's criticism of _The Odd Couple_ helped him improve
the play. Appearing on the show _Eliott Norton Reviews_ , in his conversation
with Simon, Elliott said that the play went "flat" in its final act.[5] As it
appeared originally in Boston, the characters the Pidgeon Sisters did not
appear in the final act.[1]

Simon told the _Boston Globe_ :

He invited one of the stars and the writer. He loved the play and gave it a
wonderful review but he said the third act was lacking something. On the show
he said, `You know who I missed in the third act was the Pidgeon Sisters,' and
it was like a light bulb went off in my head. It made an enormous difference
in the play. I rewrote it and it worked very well. I was so grateful to Elliot
... Elliot had such a keen eye. I don't know if he saved the play or not, but
he made it a bigger success.[2]

In 1964, Norton received the George Jean Nathan Award for drama criticism in
1964 and a special Tony Award for distinguished commentary in 1971. He was
elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1966.[4] His
show, _Elliot Norton Reviews_ , received honored the Peabody Award, one of
television's greatest honors.

The year he retired in 1982, he was honored by the establishment of the Elliot
Norton Awards to recognize theatrical excellence in the Boston theater. The
American Theater Critics Association inducted him into the Theater Hall of
Fame in 1988.[1]

The centenarian critic died on July 20, 2003 in Fort Lauderdale, Florida.

