An **emoticon** (/ɪˈmoʊtɪkɒn/, _i- MOHT-i-kon_, rarely pronounced
/ɪˈmɒtɪkɒn/),[1][2][3][4] short for "emotion icon",[5] also known simply as an
**emote** , is a pictorial representation of a facial expression using
characters—usually punctuation marks, numbers, and letters—to express a
person's feelings or mood, or as a time-saving method. The first ASCII
emoticons, `:-)` and `:-(`, were written by Scott Fahlman in 1982, but
emoticons actually originated on the PLATO IV computer system in 1972.[6]

In Western countries, emoticons are usually written at a right angle to the
direction of the text. Users from Japan popularized a kind of emoticon called
**kaomoji** (顔文字; lit. 顔(kao)=face, 文字(moji)=character(s)), utilizing the
Katakana character set, that can be understood without tilting one's head to
the left. This style arose on ASCII NET of Japan in 1986.[7][8]

As SMS and the internet became widespread in the late 1990s, emoticons became
increasingly popular and were commonly used on text messages, internet forums
and e-mails. Emoticons have played a significant role in communication through
technology, and some devices and applications have provided stylized pictures
that do not use text punctuation. They offer another range of "tone" and
feeling through texting that portrays specific emotions through facial
gestures while in the midst of text-based cyber communication.[9]

The word is a portmanteau word of the English words "emotion" and "icon". In
web forums, instant messengers and online games, text emoticons are often
automatically replaced with small corresponding images, which came to be
called "emoticons" as well. Emoticons for a smiley face `:-)` and sad face
`:-(` appear in the first documented use in digital form. Certain complex
character combinations can only be accomplished in non-Latin scripts, giving
rise to especially complex forms, sometimes known by their romanized Japanese
name of kaomoji.

The use of emoticons can be traced back to the 17th century, drawn by a Slovak
notary to indicate his satisfaction with the state of his town's municipal
financial records in 1635,[10] but they were commonly used in casual and
humorous writing. Digital forms of emoticons on the Internet were included in
a proposal by Scott Fahlman of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, in a message on September 19, 1982.[11][12]

The _National Telegraphic Review and Operators Guide_ in April 1857 documented
the use of the number 73 in Morse code to express "love and kisses" (later
reduced to the more formal "best regards"). _Dodge's Manual_ in 1908
documented the reintroduction of "love and kisses" as the number 88. Gajadhar
and Green comment that both Morse code abbreviations are more succinct than
modern abbreviations such as LOL.[13]

A _New York Times_ transcript of one of Abraham Lincoln's speeches written in
1862 contains "`(applause and laughter ;)`"; there is some debate whether it
is a typo, a legitimate punctuation construct, or an emoticon.[14]

Four vertical typographical emoticons were published in 1881 by the U.S.
satirical magazine _Puck_ , with the stated intention that the publication's
letterpress department thus intended to "lay out [...] all the cartoonists
that ever walked".

In 1912, Ambrose Bierce proposed "an improvement in punctuation – the snigger
point, or note of cachinnation: it is written thus ‿ and presents a smiling
mouth. It is to be appended, with the full stop, to every jocular or ironical
sentence".[16]

In a 1936 _Harvard Lampoon_ article, Alan Gregg proposed (-) for smile, (--)
for laugh (more teeth showing), (#) for frown, (*) for wink, and (#) for
"intense interest, attention, and incredulity".[17] Note that the symbols are
correctly oriented and are not sideways.

Emoticons had already come into use in sci-fi fandom in the 1940s,[18]
although there seems to have been a lapse in cultural continuity between the
communities.

The September 1962 issue of _MAD_ magazine included an article titled
"Typewri-toons". The piece, featuring typewriter-generated artwork credited to
"Royal Portable", was entirely made up of repurposed typography, including a
capital letter P having a bigger bust than a capital I, a lowercase b and d
discussing their pregnancies, an asterisk on top of a letter to indicate the
letter had just come inside from a snowfall, and a classroom of lowercase n's
interrupted by a lowercase h "raising its hand".[19] Two additional "Typewri-
toons" articles subsequently appeared in _Mad_ , in 1965 and 1987.

In 1963, the "smiley face", a yellow button with two black dots representing
eyes and an upturned thick curve representing a mouth was created by freelance
artist Harvey Ball. It was realized on order of a large insurance company as
part of a campaign to bolster the morale of its employees and soon became a
big hit. This smiley presumably inspired many later emoticons; the most basic
graphic emoticon that depicts this is, in fact, a small yellow smiley face.

In a _New York Times_ interview in April 1969, Alden Whitman asked writer
Vladimir Nabokov: "How do you rank yourself among writers (living) and of the
immediate past?" Nabokov answered: "I often think there should exist a special
typographical sign for a smile – some sort of concave mark, a supine round
bracket, which I would now like to trace in reply to your question."[20]

In 1971, a French journalist, Franklin Loufrani, created a smiley logo to mark
good news in the French newspaper _France Soir_. Loufrani was the first person
to trademark the symbol, in 1972.[21][22] Later, in 1996, Loufrani established
The Smiley Company with his son, Nicolas Loufrani. Nicolas developed hundreds
of different emoticons, including 3D versions. His designs were registered at
the United States Copyright Office in 1997 and appeared online as .gif files
in 1998.[23][24][25] These were the first graphical representations of the
originally text-based emoticon.[26] He published his icons as well as
emoticons created by others, along with their ASCII versions, in an online
Smiley Dictionary in the early 2000s.[23] This dictionary included over 3,000
different Smileys[27] and was published as a book called _Dico Smileys_ in
2002.[23][28] The Smiley Company has trademarked its version of the smiley
face in over 100 countries.[29] In 1997, The Smiley Company filed a trademark
application with the United States Patent and Trademark Office. In 2001,
Walmart opposed the registration, citing a likelihood of confusion between the
Loufrani smiley and a smiley face Walmart had been using since 1990. The USPTO
eventually sided with Walmart and rejected The Smiley Company's application,
due to the widespread use of smiley face designs. Seeking to prevent Walmart
from using any smiley face design, Nicolas Loufrani next sued Walmart in
federal court in 2009, while claiming that his smiley face was "readily
distinguishable" from Walmart's. The case was closed in 2011 when the two
parties agreed to settle out of court. The terms of the settlement were
undisclosed, but Walmart continued to use its smiley design intermittently and
returned to using it in a major marketing role in 2016.[29][30]

Starting circa 1972, on the PLATO system, emoticons and other decorative
graphics were produced as ASCII art, particularly with overprinting: typing a
character, backing up, then typing another character. For example, WOBTAX and
VICTORY both produced convincing smiley faces (where the overprinted
characters produced the solid background, and pixels untouched by any of the
characters produced the actual design). This developed into a sophisticated
set, particularly in combination with superscript and subscript.[31]

Scott Fahlman was the first documented person to use the emoticons `:-)` and
`:-(`, with a specific suggestion that they be used to express emotion.[32]
The text of his original proposal, posted to the Carnegie Mellon University
computer science general board on September 19, 1982 (11:44), was thought to
have been lost, but was recovered 20 years later by Jeff Baird from old backup
tapes.[11]

Other notable computer scientists who participated in this thread include
David Touretzky, Guy Steele, and Jaime Carbonell.

Within a few months, it had spread to the ARPANET[33] and Usenet.[34] Many
variations on the theme were immediately suggested by Scott and others.

Usually, emoticons in Western style have the eyes on the left, followed by
nose and the mouth. The two character version `:)` which omits the nose is
also very popular.

The most basic emoticons are relatively consistent in form, but each of them
can be transformed by being rotated (making them tiny ambigrams), with or
without a hyphen (nose).

There are also some possible variations to emoticons to get new definitions,
like changing a character to express a new feeling, or slightly change the
mood of the emoticon. For example, `:(` equals sad and `:((` equals very sad.
Weeping can be written as `:'(`. A blush can be expressed as `:">`. Others
include wink `;)`, a grin `:D`, smug `:->`, and tongue out `:P`, such as when
blowing a raspberry. An often used combination is also `<3` for a heart, and
`</3` for a broken heart. `:O` is also sometimes used to depict shock.

A broad grin is sometimes shown with crinkled eyes to express further
amusement; `XD` and the addition of further "D" letters can suggest laughter
or extreme amusement e.g. `XDDDD`. There are hundreds of other variations
including `>:(` for anger, or `>:D` for an evil grin, which can be, again,
used in reverse, for an unhappy angry face, in the shape of `D:<`. `=K` for
vampire teeth, `:s` for grimace, and `;P` can be used to denote a flirting or
joking tone, or may be implying a second meaning in the sentence preceding
it.[35]

As computers offer increasing built-in support for non-Western writing
systems, it has become possible to use other glyphs to build emoticons. The
'shrug' emoticon, `¯\_(ツ)_/¯`, uses the glyph ツ from the Japanese katakana
writing system.

An equal sign is often used for the eyes in place of the colon, seen as `=)`,
without changing the meaning of the emoticon. In these instances, the hyphen
is almost always either omitted or, occasionally, replaced with an "o" as in
`=O)`. In most circles it has become acceptable to omit the hyphen, whether a
colon or an equal sign is used for the eyes,[36] but in some areas of usage
people still prefer the larger, more traditional emoticon `:-)` or `:^)`. One
linguistic study has indicated that the use of a nose in an emoticon may be
related to the user's age.[ _how?_ ][37] Similar-looking characters are
commonly substituted for one another: for instance, `o`, `O`, and `0` can all
be used interchangeably, sometimes for subtly different effect or, in some
cases, one type of character may look better in a certain font and therefore
be preferred over another. It is also common for the user to replace the
rounded brackets used for the mouth with other, similar brackets, such as `]`
instead of `)`.

Some variants are also more common in certain countries due to keyboard
layouts. For example, the smiley `=)` may occur in Scandinavia, where the keys
for `=` and `)` are placed right beside each other. However, the `:)` variant
is without a doubt the dominant one in Scandinavia, making the `=)` version a
rarity. Diacritical marks are sometimes used. The letters `Ö` and `Ü` can be
seen as an emoticon, as the upright version of `:O` (meaning that one is
surprised) and `:D` (meaning that one is very happy) respectively.

Some emoticons may be read right to left instead, and in fact can only be
written using standard ASCII keyboard characters this way round; for example
`D:` which refers to being shocked or anxious, opposite to the large grin of
`:D`.

Users from Japan popularized a style of emoticons (顔文字, _kaomoji, lit._ "face
characters") that can be understood without tilting one's head to the left.
This style arose on ASCII NET, an early Japanese online service, in
1986.[7][8] Similar-looking emoticons were used on the Byte Information
Exchange (BIX) around the same time.[38]

These emoticons are usually found in a format similar to `(*_*)`. The
asterisks indicate the eyes; the central character, commonly an underscore,
the mouth; and the parentheses, the outline of the face.

Different emotions can be expressed by changing the character representing the
eyes: for example, "T" can be used to express crying or sadness: `(T_T)`.
`T_T` may also be used to mean "unimpressed". The emphasis on the eyes in this
style is reflected in the common usage of emoticons that use only the eyes,
e.g. `^^`. Looks of stress are represented by the likes of `(x_x)`, while
`(-_-;)` is a generic emoticon for nervousness, the semicolon representing an
anxiety-induced sweat drop (discussed further below). `///` can indicate
embarrassment by symbolizing blushing.[39] Characters like hyphens or periods
can replace the underscore; the period is often used for a smaller, "cuter"
mouth, or to represent a nose, e.g. `(^.^)`. Alternatively, the mouth/nose can
be left out entirely, e.g. `(^^)`.

Parentheses are sometimes replaced with braces or square brackets, e.g.
`{^_^}` or `[o_0]`. Many times, the parentheses are left out completely, e.g.
`^^`,` >.< `, `o_O`, `O.O`, `e_e`, or `e.e`. A quotation mark `"`, apostrophe
`'`, or semicolon `;` can be added to the emoticon to imply apprehension or
embarrassment, in the same way that a sweat drop is used in manga and anime.

Microsoft IME 2000 (Japanese) or later supports the input of emoticons like
the above by enabling the Microsoft IME Spoken Language/Emotion Dictionary. In
IME 2007, this support was moved to the Emoticons dictionary. Such
dictionaries allow users to call up emoticons by typing words that represent
them.

Communication software allowing the use of Shift JIS encoded Japanese
characters rather than just ASCII allowed for the development of new kaomoji
using the extended character set, such as `(^ム^)` or `(益)`.

Modern communication software generally utilizes Unicode, which allows for the
incorporation of characters from other languages (e.g. from the Cyrillic
alphabet), and a variety of symbols into the kaomoji, as in `(`Д´)` or
`(◕‿◕✿)`.

Further variations can be produced using Unicode combining characters, as in
`٩(͡๏̯͡๏)۶` or `ᶘᵒᴥᵒᶅ`.

English-language anime forums adopted those Japanese-style emoticons that
could be used with the standard ASCII characters available on Western
keyboards. Because of this, they are often called "anime style" emoticons in
English[ _citation needed_ ]. They have since seen use in more mainstream
venues, including online gaming, instant-messaging, and non-anime-related
discussion forums. Emoticons such as `<( ^.^ )>`, `<(^_^<)`, `<(o_o<)`, `<(
-'.'- )>`, `<('.'-^)`, or `(>';..;')>` which include the parentheses, mouth or
nose, and arms (especially those represented by the inequality signs < or >)
also are often referred to as "Kirbys" in reference to their likeness to
Nintendo's video game character Kirby. The parentheses are sometimes dropped
when used in the English language context, and the underscore of the mouth may
be extended as an intensifier for the emoticon in question, e.g. `^_________^`
for very happy. The emoticon `t(-_-t)` uses the Eastern style, but
incorporates a depiction of the Western "middle-finger flick-off" using a "t"
as the arm, hand, and finger. Using a lateral click for the nose such as in (
͡° ͜ʖ ͡°) is believed to originate from the Finnish image-based message board
Ylilauta, and is called a "Lenny face".[40] Another apparently Western
invention is the use of emoticons like `*,..,*` or ``;..;´` to indicate
vampires or other mythical beasts with fangs.

Exposure to both Western and Japanese style emoticons or kaomoji through
blogs, instant messaging, and forums featuring a blend of Western and Japanese
pop culture has given rise to many emoticons that have an upright viewing
format. The parentheses are often dropped, and these emoticons typically only
use alphanumeric characters and the most commonly used English punctuation
marks. Emoticons such as `-O-`, `-3-`, `-w-`, `'_'`, `;_;`, `T_T`, `:>`, and
`.V.` are used to convey mixed emotions that are more difficult to convey with
traditional emoticons. Characters are sometimes added to emoticons to convey
an anime- or manga-styled sweat drop, for example `^_^'`, `!>_<!`,
`<@>_____<@>;;`, `;O;`, and `*u*`. The equals sign can also be used for
closed, anime-looking eyes, for example `=0=`, `=3=`, `=w=`, `=A=`, and `=7=`.
The `uwu` face (and its variations `UwU` and `OwO`), is an emoticon of
Japanese origin which denotes a cute expression or emotion felt by the
user.[41][42]

In Brazil, sometimes combining characters (accents) are added to emoticons to
represent eyebrows, as in `ò_ó`, `ó_ò`, `õ_o`, `ù_u`, or `o_Ô`.

Users of the Japanese discussion board 2channel, in particular, have developed
a wide variety of unique emoticons using characters from various languages,
such as Kannada, as in `ಠ_ಠ` (for a look of disapproval, disbelief, or
confusion). These were quickly picked up by 4chan and spread to other Western
sites soon after. Some have taken on a life of their own and become characters
in their own right, like Monā.

In South Korea, emoticons use Korean Hangul letters, and the Western style is
rarely used. The structures of Korean and Japanese emoticons are somewhat
similar, but they have some differences. Korean style contains Korean jamo
(letters) instead of other characters. There are countless number of emoticons
that can be formed with such combinations of Korean jamo letters. Consonant
jamos `ㅅ`, `ㅁ` or `ㅂ` as the mouth/nose component and `ㅇ`, `ㅎ` or `ㅍ` for the
eyes. For example: `ㅇㅅㅇ`, `ㅇㅂㅇ`, `ㅇㅁㅇ` and `-ㅅ-`. Faces such as `'ㅅ'`, `"ㅅ"`,
`'ㅂ'` and `'ㅇ'`, using quotation marks `"` and apostrophes `'` are also
commonly used combinations. Vowel jamos such as ㅜ,ㅠ depict a crying face.
Example: `ㅜㅜ`, `ㅠㅠ` and `뉴뉴` (same function as T in western style). Sometimes
ㅡ (not an em-dash "—" but a vowel jamo), a comma or an underscore is added,
and the two character sets can be mixed together, as in `ㅜ.ㅜ`, `ㅠ.ㅜ`, `ㅠ.ㅡ`,
`ㅜ_ㅠ`, `ㅡ^ㅜ` and `ㅜㅇㅡ`. Also, semicolons and carets are commonly used in
Korean emoticons; semicolons mean sweating (embarrassed). If they are used
with ㅡ or – they depict a bad feeling. Examples: `-;/`, `--^`, `ㅡㅡ;;;`,
`-_-;;` and `-_^`. However, `^^, ^오^` means smile (almost all people use this
without distinction of sex or age). Others include: `~_~`, `--a`, `-6-`,
`+0+`.

The character 囧 (U+56E7), which means "bright", It is also combined with
posture emoticon Orz, such as 囧rz. The character existed in Oracle bone
script, but its use as emoticon was documented as early as January 20,
2005.[43]

Other ideographic variants for 囧 include 崮 (king 囧), 莔 (queen 囧), 商 (囧 with
hat), 囧興 (turtle), 卣 (Bomberman).

The character 槑 (U+69D1), which sounds like the word for "plum" (梅 (U+FA44)),
is used to represent double of 呆 (dull), or further magnitude of dullness. In
Chinese, normally full characters (as opposed to the stylistic use of 槑) may
be duplicated to express emphasis.

On the Russian speaking internet, the right parenthesis `)` is used as a
smiley. Multiple parentheses `))))` are used to express greater happiness,
amusement or laughter. It is commonly placed at the end of a sentence. The
colon is omitted due to being in a lesser known and difficult to type position
on the ЙЦУКЕН keyboard layout.[ _citation needed_ ]

Orz (other forms include: Or2, on_, OTZ, OTL, STO, JTO,[44] _no, ＿冂○,[45]
囧​rz,[43]) is an emoticon representing a kneeling or bowing person (the
Japanese version of which is called _dogeza_ ) with the "o" being the head,
the "r" being the arms and part of the body, and the "z" being part of the
body and the legs. This stick figure can represent failure and despair.[44] It
is also commonly used for representing a great admiration (sometimes with an
overtone of sarcasm) for someone else's view or action.[ _citation needed_ ]

It was first used in late 2002 at the forum on Techside, a Japanese personal
website. At the "Techside FAQ Forum" (TECHSIDE教えて君BBS(教えてBBS) ), a poster
asked about a cable cover, typing "＿|￣|○" to show a cable and its cover.
Others commented that it looked like a kneeling person, and the symbol became
popular.[46] These comments were soon deleted as they were considered off-
topic. By 2005, Orz spawned a subculture: blogs have been devoted to the
emoticon, and URL shortening services have been named after it. In Taiwan, Orz
is associated with the phrase "nice guy" – that is, the concept of males being
rejected for a date by girls they are pursuing with a phrase like "You are a
nice guy."[44]

Orz should not be confused with **m(_ _)m** , which means "Thank you" or an
apology.[47]

A portmanteau of _emotion_ and _sound_ , an **emotisound** is a brief sound
transmitted and played back during the viewing of a message, typically an IM
message or e-mail message. The sound is intended to communicate an emotional
subtext.[ _citation needed_ ][48] Many instant messaging clients automatically
trigger sound effects in response to specific emoticons.[ _citation needed_ ]

Some services, such as MuzIcons, combine emoticons and music player in an
Adobe Flash-based widget.[49]

In 2004, the Trillian chat application introduced a feature called
"emotiblips", which allows Trillian users to stream files to their instant
message recipients "as the voice and video equivalent of an emoticon".[50]

In 2007, MTV and Paramount Home Entertainment promoted the "emoticlip" as a
form of viral marketing for the second season of the show _The Hills_. The
emoticlips were twelve short snippets of dialogue from the show, uploaded to
YouTube, which the advertisers hoped would be distributed between web users as
a way of expressing feelings in a similar manner to emoticons. The emoticlip
concept is credited to the Bradley & Montgomery advertising firm, which hopes
they would be widely adopted as "greeting cards that just happen to be selling
something".[51]

In 2008, an emotion-sequence animation tool, called FunIcons was created. The
Adobe Flash and Java-based application allows users to create a short
animation. Users can then email or save their own animations to use them on
similar social utility applications.[52]

During the first half of the 2010s, there have been different forms of small
audiovisual pieces to be sent through instant messaging systems to express
one's emotion. These videos lack an established name, and there are several
ways to designate them: "emoticlips" (named above), "emotivideos" or more
recently "emoticon videos". These are tiny videos which can be easily
transferred from one mobile phone or other device to another. Current video
compression codecs such as H.264 allow these pieces of video to be light in
terms of file size and very portable. The popular computer and mobile app
Skype uses these in a separate keyboard or by typing the code of the "emoticon
videos" between parentheses.

In 2000, Despair, Inc. obtained a U.S. trademark registration for the "frowny"
emoticon `:-(` when used on "greeting cards, posters and art prints". In 2001,
they issued a satirical press release, announcing that they would sue Internet
users who typed the frowny; the joke backfired and the company received a
storm of protest when its mock release was posted on technology news website
Slashdot.[53]

A number of patent applications have been filed on inventions that assist in
communicating with emoticons. A few of these have been issued as US patents.
US 6987991 , for example, discloses a method developed in 2001 to send
emoticons over a cell phone using a drop-down menu. The stated advantage over
the prior art was that the user saved on the number of keystrokes though this
may not address the obviousness criteria.

The emoticon `:-)` was also filed in 2006 and registered in 2008 as a European
Community Trademark (CTM). In Finland, the Supreme Administrative Court ruled
in 2012 that the emoticon cannot be trademarked,[54] thus repealing a 2006
administrative decision trademarking the emoticons `:-)`, `=)`, `=(`, `:)` and
`:(`.[55]

In 2005, a Russian court rejected a legal claim against Siemens by a man who
claimed to hold a trademark on the `;-)` emoticon.[56]

In 2008, Russian entrepreneur Oleg Teterin claimed to have been granted the
trademark on the `;-)` emoticon. A license would not "cost that much – tens of
thousands of dollars" for companies, but would be free of charge for
individuals.[56]

Some smiley faces were present in Unicode since 1.1, including a white
frowning face, a white smiling face, and a black smiling face. ("Black" refers
to a glyph which is filled, "white" refers to a glyph which is unfilled).[57]

The Emoticons block was introduced in Unicode Standard version 6.0 (published
in October 2010) and extended by 7.0. It covers Unicode range from U+1F600 to
U+1F64F fully.[58]

After that block had been filled, Unicode 8.0 (2015), 9.0 (2016) and 10.0
(2017) added additional emoticons in the range from U+1F910 to U+1F9FF.
Currently, U+1F90C – U+1F90F, U+1F93F, U+1F94D – U+1F94F, U+1F96C – U+1F97F,
U+1F998 – U+1F9CF (excluding U+1F9C0 which contains the 🧀 emoji) and 1F9E7 –
1F9FF do not contain any emoticons since Unicode 10.0.

For historic and compatibility reasons, some other heads and figures, which
mostly represent different aspects like genders, activities and professions
instead of emotions, are also found in Miscellaneous Symbols and Pictographs
(especially U+1F466 – U+1F487) and Transport and Map Symbols. Body parts,
mostly hands, are also encoded in the Dingbat and Miscellaneous Symbols
blocks.

