EMSL (pronounced em-zul), or the William R. Wiley **Environmental Molecular
Sciences Laboratory** , is a national scientific user facility located at
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Washington. EMSL is funded
by the Department of Energy’s Office of Biological and Environmental Research.
EMSL provides experimental and computational resources to address the
environmental molecular science challenges facing DOE and the nation.

EMSL offers the global scientific community a range of capabilities and
expertise. Access to EMSL's capabilities is gained through a peer-reviewed
proposal process. If a proposal is accepted and the scientist publishes in the
open literature, there typically is no charge for using the EMSL
instrumentation and capabilities. EMSL provides proposal opportunities
throughout the year.[1]

Since it opened in 1997, scientists from all 50 states and more than 35
countries have used EMSL to support their scientific efforts.

Research at EMSL is focused on gaining an understanding of the physics,
chemistry and biology governing environmental processes starting at the
molecular scale and propagating to larger scales. EMSL's research focus has
been defined into four science themes.[2]

EMSL capabilities include:

EMSL facilities include a Quiet Wing[3] that opened in early 2012 and a EMSL's
RadEMSL (Radiochemistry Annex)[4] that opened to the global user community in
the spring 2014.

EMSL staff and scientific consultants are experts in chemical, physical,
biological and computational sciences. They have received numerous awards,
been named to society fellowships, have received patents and publish in
scientific journals.[5] Since 2009, EMSL staff members have received nearly
two dozen awards and honors.[6] In fiscal year 2010, EMSL staff and user
research appeared in more than 350 articles, including many in journals, such
as _Science_ , _Nature_ , _Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences_
and _Journal of the American Chemical Society_.[6]

[6][7] **The beginnings (1986–1997)**

The idea that would become EMSL began in 1985 with a National Academy of
Sciences report entitled _Opportunities in Chemistry_. The report identified
scientific challenges relating to energy and the environment that required
fundamental research to achieve a solution. Then director of PNNL William R.
Wiley and lab senior managers met to discuss the report and how PNNL could
respond to the nation's scientific challenges that were critically dependent
on fundamental advances in chemistry. Their recommendations would become EMSL,
a center with advanced instrumentation for the study of molecular-level
chemistry.

Wiley envisioned a facility where the research was conducted in an integrated
and collaborative manner. “Problems don’t come in small, unique,
compartmentalized packages. We must recognize the interrelationships,” said
Wiley.

Ohio-based Battelle Memorial Institute, which operates PNNL for the U.S.
Department of Energy, approved $8.5 million in funding over four years to
establish the facility; develop research programs; and obtain the equipment,
facilities, scientists and staff to support these programs.

The DOE authorized PNNL to proceed in October 1993, and PNNL began
construction of the facility in July 1994. The facility was dedicated on
October 16, 1996, in honor of Wiley, who died three months earlier.
Construction was completed in August 1997. Then-DOE Secretary Hazel O'Leary
delivered the dedication speech and Wiley's wife, Gus, cut the ribbon. EMSL
opened Oct. 1, 1997, for full operation as DOE's newest national scientific
user facility.

**The early years (1997–2001)** During its first five years, EMSL operations
focused on building capabilities, recruiting scientific leadership and
attracting users. The scientific focus then expanded to include biology,
particularly the study of naturally occurring microbes for environmental
cleanup, alternative energy, and carbon dioxide reduction in the atmosphere –
critical challenges addressed by DOE.

EMSL's early user program focused on single investigator studies –
particularly those Wiley championed that crossed disciplinary boundaries – and
quickly reached more than 1,000 users per year, representing every state and
several foreign countries.

**A maturing program (2001–2009)** In this period there were two grand
challenges. These challenges were team-based, multi-investigator research
efforts targeted on two key challenges related to DOE missions:

EMSL recently refined its scientific focus into four Science Themes:

In January 2007, EMSL celebrated its first permanent expansion: a nearly
4,000-square-foot raised floor within its high-performance computing
operations center to accommodate a more powerful supercomputer. In April 2008,
EMSL dedicated a new office pod to distinguished user J. Mike White that
houses nearly 100 staff and users. At the same time, EMSL management began
pursuing plans for a Radiochemistry Annex and a Quiet Wing.

**Building for the future (2009 to present)**

In 2009, DOE announced a $60 million investment in capabilities for EMSL from
the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, or ARRA. EMSL used the funds to
upgrade some existing capabilities, as well as developing and deploying
totally new systems and capabilities.

At this same time, EMSL directed capital funds toward construction of the $8
million Quiet Wing to house up to eight microscopy instruments. The Quiet Wing
opened in early 2012. Additionally, EMSL moved forward with plans for a
radiological chemistry capability with a Radiochemistry Annex, slated to open
in 2014.

Coordinates: 46°20′55″N 119°16′42″W﻿ / ﻿46.34861°N 119.27833°W﻿ / 46.34861;
-119.27833

