**ETC** (stylized as **etc** ) is a commercial broadcasting television network
in the Philippines owned by Solar Entertainment Corporation through its
subsidiary Southern Broadcasting Network. Its free-to-air broadcast is carried
by SBN's flagship station DWCP-TV Channel 21 Metro Manila. The channel can
also be seen nationwide in all SBN provincial TV stations. The channel is also
carried by cable/satellite providers, including Sky Cable/Destiny Cable (Metro
Manila), Cablelink, Sky Direct, Cignal and SatLite, along with various
provincial cable operators and through online streaming.

ETC operates daily (including the annual Paschal Triduum) from 6:00 AM to 1:00
AM on analog free TV, while it operates for 24 hours on Solar's digital free
TV (under test-broadcast) as well as on most pay TV and streaming service
providers.

ETC broadcasts from Solar's master control facility and studios located at the
Third Floor of the Worldwide Corporate Center, Epifanio de los Santos corner
Shaw Boulevard, Mandaluyong City, while SBN's sales office is located at the
22/F Strata 2000 Bldg., F. Ortigas Jr., Road, Ortigas Center, Pasig City. SBN
holds free-to-air broadcasts from its transmitter and tower site located at
Nuestra Se√±ora de la Paz Subdivision, Bo. Sta. Cruz, Antipolo, Rizal.

On January 1, 2004, ETC was launched on various cable and satellite providers
as "Entertainment Central".

On January 1, 2008, ETC ceased to air over Sky Cable as a separate channel. As
part of the Solar network's block-time agreements with various terrestrial
channels, ETC started airing over SBN 21, a terrestrial UHF TV station in the
Philippines.

On March 2, 2011, ETC had moved to RPN after the network was privatized, while
Talk TV, a news-oriented channel airing local and US news programs, launched
on SBN 21.[2][3][4][5][6][7]

However, ETC returned to SBN on November 30, 2013, as Solar News Channel moved
to RPN the following day to allow SNC's wider coverage. (SNC and RPN, however,
were sold to ALC Group of Companies chair, Ambassador Antonio Cabangon Chua,
in August the following year, due to the Tieng's loss of revenue after
investing on RPN.) [8][9]

After its sister channel 2nd Avenue ended broadcasting on June 5, 2018 after
12 years of broadcasts, many of its programs moved to this channel.

On November 21, 2018, ETC unveiled its new station ID and on-air graphics. At
the same time, the network also launched their new slogan, _In Full Bloom_.

Mainly targeting the young adult demographics,[10] ETC's programming currently
consists of sitcoms, drama series, reality and entertainment news programs
from the U.S. The network also produces and/or airs local programming,
including news programs, lifestyle, infotainment and entertainment programs
_Etcetera_[11] and reality programs _Project Runway Philippines_ , _I Am Meg_
and _Mega Fashion Crew_ , the latter of which is produced by the One Mega
Group and TV 100 Production.[12]

According to National Urban Television Audience Measurement, ETC is the top-
ranked female television channel with cable and free TV ratings combined
(January 2012 - May 2012) with a 10.33% audience share.[13]

