**Eva Le Gallienne** (January 11, 1899 – June 3, 1991) was a British-born
American stage actress, producer, director, translator, and author. A Broadway
star by age 21, Le Gallienne consciously ended her work on Broadway to devote
herself to founding the Civic Repertory Theatre, in which she was both
director, producer, and lead actress. Noted for her boldness and idealism, she
became a pioneering figure in the American Repertory Movement, which enabled
today's Off-Broadway. A versatile and eloquent actress herself (playing roles
ranging from _Peter Pan_ to _Hamlet_ ), Le Gallienne also became a respected
stage coach, director, producer and manager.

Le Gallienne consciously devoted herself to the art of the theatre as opposed
to the show business of Broadway and dedicated herself to upgrading the
quality of the stage. She ran the Civic Repertory Theatre Company for 10 years
(1926–1936), producing 37 plays during that time. She managed Broadway's
1100-seat Civic Repertory Theatre at 107 West 14th Street from 1926 to 1932,
which was home to her company whose actors included herself, Burgess Meredith,
John Garfield, J. Edward Bromberg, Paul Leyssac, Florida Friebus, David
Manners, and Leona Roberts.

Le Gallienne was born in London to Richard Le Gallienne, an English poet of
French descent, and Julie Nørregaard, a Danish journalist. They married in
1897 and separated in 1903, later divorcing.[1] After Eva's parents separated
when she was four years old, she and her mother moved to Paris, where she
spent her childhood shuttling back and forth between there and Britain. While
in Paris, she was taken backstage to meet Sarah Bernhardt, which, she said
"made an enormous impression on me". She made her stage debut at the age of 15
with a walk-on role in a 1914 production of Maurice Maeterlinck's _Monna
Vanna_ , then spent several months in a drama school. She left to perform in a
minor comedy as a cockney servant, and "brought down the house", receiving
excellent reviews.[2]

The next year, at the age of 16, Le Gallienne and her mother sailed for New
York City, where her first few productions were not successful, and she was
released from another while it was performing in out of town tryouts.[2] She
then spent a season performing on the road and in summer stock. After
travelling in Europe for a period of time, she returned to New York and became
a Broadway star in several plays including Arthur Richman's _Not So Long Ago_
(1920) and Ferenc Molnár's _Liliom_ (1921) for the Theatre Guild.[2]

Le Gallienne consciously devoted herself to the "art of the theatre" as
opposed to the "show business of Broadway", and was a pioneer in the emerging
American Repertory Theater. She ran the Civic Repertory Theatre Company for 10
years (1926–1936), backed by the financial support of one of her lovers, Alice
DeLamar, a wealthy Colorado gold mine heiress, producing 37 plays during that
time. She managed Broadway's 1100-seat Civic Repertory Theatre (more popularly
known as The 14th Street Theatre) at 107 West 14th Street from 1926–32, which
was home to her company whose actors included herself, J. Edward Bromberg,
Paul Leyssac, Florida Friebus, and Leona Roberts. As head of the Civic
Repertory Theatre, she rejected the admission of Bette Davis, whose attitude
she described as "insincere" and "frivolous". The Civic Rep disbanded at the
height of the Depression in 1934, having mounted 34 productions.[3][4] Le
Gallienne was awarded the National Medal of Arts in 1986.

Le Gallienne never hid her lesbianism inside the acting community, but
reportedly was never comfortable with her sexuality, struggling privately with
it. She reportedly briefly considered arranging for a "front" marriage with
actor Basil Rathbone.[5]

During the early days of her career she often was in the company of witty,
libertine actresses Tallulah Bankhead, Estelle Winwood and Blyth Daly, with
the four being dubbed "The Four Horsemen of the Algonquin", referring to the
Algonquin Round Table.[5]

In 1918, while in Hollywood, she began an affair with the actress Alla
Nazimova, who was at her height of fame, and who at that time wielded much
power in the acting community. The affair ended reportedly due to Nazimova's
jealousy. Nonetheless, Nazimova liked Le Gallienne very much, and assisted in
her being introduced to many influential people of the day. It was Nazimova
who coined the phrase "sewing circles", to describe the intricate and secret
lesbian relationships lived by many actresses of the day. Le Gallienne also
was involved for some time with actresses Tallulah Bankhead, Beatrice Lillie
and Laurette Taylor during that time.[5]

In 1920, she became involved with poet, novelist and playwright Mercedes de
Acosta about whom she was passionate for several years.[6] She and de Acosta
began their romance shortly after de Acosta's marriage to Abram Poole which
strained their relationship. Still, they vacationed and travelled together
often, at times visiting the salon of famed writer and socialite Natalie
Barney.[5] De Acosta wrote two plays for Le Gallienne during that time,
_Sandro Botticelli_ and _Jehanne de Arc_. Neither was successful. They ended
their relationship after five years.[7] In 1960, when de Acosta was seriously
ill with a brain tumour and in need of money, she published her memoir _Here
Lies the Heart_. The reviews were positive and many close friends praised the
book.[8] Le Gallienne was furious, denouncing de Acosta as a liar and claiming
she invented the stories for fame. But many of de Acosta's affairs, including
that with Le Gallienne, are confirmed in personal correspondence.[9]

By early 1927, Le Gallienne was involved with married actress Josephine
Hutchinson. Hutchinson's husband started divorce proceedings and named Le
Gallienne in the divorce proceedings as "co-respondent". The press began
accusations that named Josephine Hutchinson as a "shadow actress", which at
the time meant lesbian. Five months later, Le Gallienne performed in a play
about Emily Dickinson, titled _Alison's House_. The play won a Pulitzer
Prize.[5]

Le Gallienne and Hutchinson performed together in several plays at the Civic
Repertory Theatre, including in _Dear Jane_ (1932), a play by Eleanor Holmes
Hinkley based on the life of Jane Austen. Hutchinson was cast as Jane, and Le
Gallienne both directed and played her sister, Cassandra Austen. At the play's
end, Hutchinson's Jane refuses three male suitors in order to run off to an
unmarried future living with her sister, Le Gallienne's Cassandra.[10]

For a time after the Hutchinson scandal, Le Gallienne drank heavily. According
to biographer Robert Schanke, the actress's anxiety over being lesbian haunted
her terribly during this time. One cold winter's night, drunk, she wandered
over to a female neighbour's house. During the conversation that followed, she
told her neighbour "If you have any thoughts about being a lesbian, don't do
it. Your life will be nothing but tragedy."[5]

Another biographer, Helen Sheehy, has rejected Schanke's portrait of the
actress as a self-hating lesbian. Sheehy quotes Le Gallienne's words of advice
to her close friend May Sarton, who was also a lesbian: "People hate what they
don't understand and try to destroy it. Only try to keep yourself clear and
don't allow that destructive force to spoil something that to you is simple,
natural, and beautiful." Similarly, Le Gallienne told a friend, Eloise Armen,
that love between women was "the most beautiful thing in the world." She
starred as Peter Pan in a revival that opened on November 6, 1928, and
presented the lead character full of elfin and boyish charm. The flying
effects were superbly designed, and for the first time Peter flew out over the
heads of the audience. The critics loved "LeG", as she became known, and more
than a few favoured her performance over that of Maude Adams, who had
originated the role. The Civic Repertory Theatre presented _Peter Pan_ 129
times.[ _citation needed_ ]

In late 1929, just after the stock market crash, Le Gallienne was on the cover
of _TIME_. During the Great Depression that followed, she was offered
directorship of the National Theatre Division of the Works Progress
Administration by President Franklin D. Roosevelt. She declined on the grounds
that she preferred working with "true talent" rather than nurturing jobs for
struggling actors and actresses. She was instrumental in the early careers of
Peter Falk and Uta Hagen, whom she cast as Ophelia opposite her own portrayal
of Shakespeare's Prince Hamlet.[5]

In the late 1930s Le Gallienne became involved in a relationship with theatre
director Margaret Webster. She, Webster, and producer Cheryl Crawford co-
founded The American Repertory Theater – no relation to the institution in
Cambridge, Massachusetts later founded by Robert Brustein – which operated
from 1946 to 1948.[11] In the following years, she lived with her companion
Marion Evensen (September 28, 1891 – September, 1971). In the late 1950s she
enjoyed great success playing the role of Queen Elizabeth in _Mary Stuart_ ,
an off-Broadway production.[2]

In 1964, Le Gallienne was presented with a special Tony Award in recognition
of her 50th year as an actress and in honour of her work with the National
Repertory Theatre.[12] The National Endowment for the Arts also recognised her
with the National Medal of Arts in 1986. Le Gallienne became a naturalized
United States citizen in 1927.[13][14][15]

In 1982, Le Gallienne returned to the stage to play the White Queen in _Alice
in Wonderland_ at the Virginia Theatre, directed by Le Gallienne and co-
directed by John Strasberg.[16] This production was produced by Sabra Jones
and was intended to initiate The Mirror Theater Ltd and the Mirror Repertory
Company.

Although known primarily for her theatre work, she has also appeared in films
and television productions. She earned an Oscar nomination for her work in
_Resurrection_ , for which she gained the honour of being the oldest Oscar
nominee up to that time (1980) until Gloria Stuart in 1997; and won an Emmy
Award for a televised version of _The Royal Family_ after having starred in a
Broadway revival of that play in 1976. She made a rare guest appearance in a
1984 episode of _St. Elsewhere_ which starred her former apprentice Norman
Lloyd, appearing with Brenda Vaccaro and Blythe Danner as three women sharing
a hospital room.[ _citation needed_ ]

On June 3, 1991, Le Gallienne died at her home in Weston, Connecticut from
natural causes, aged 92, and her ashes were scattered over her property in
Weston, Connecticut.[17]

Source:[18]

**Bibliography**

