The **Exelon Pavilions** are four buildings that generate electricity from
solar energy and provide access to underground parking in Millennium Park in
the Loop community area of Chicago in Cook County, Illinois, United States.[1]
The **Northeast Exelon Pavilion** and **Northwest Exelon Pavilion** (jointly
the North Exelon Pavilions) are located on the northern edge of the park along
Randolph Street, and flank the Harris Theater. The **Southeast Exelon
Pavilion** and **Southwest Exelon Pavilion** (jointly the South Exelon
Pavilions) are located on the southern edge of the park along Monroe Street,
and flank the Lurie Garden. Together the pavilions generate 19,840 kilowatt-
hours (71,400 MJ) of electricity annually,[2] worth about $2,350 per year.[3]

The four pavilions, which cost $7 million,[4] were designed in January 2001;
construction began in January 2004. The South Pavilions were completed and
opened in July 2004, while the North Pavilions were completed in November
2004, with a grand opening on April 30, 2005.[5] In addition to producing
energy, three of the four pavilions provide access to the parking garages
below the park,[6] while the fourth serves as the park's welcome center and
office.[7] Exelon, a company that generates the electricity transmitted by its
subsidiary Commonwealth Edison,[4] donated $5.5 million for the
pavilions.[2][8][9] _Chicago Tribune_ architecture critic Blair Kamin praised
the South Pavilions as "minor modernist jewels", but criticized the North
Pavilions as "nearly all black and impenetrable".[4] The North Pavilions have
received the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) silver
rating from the United States Green Building Council, as well as an award from
the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers
(ASHRAE).[10]

Lying between Lake Michigan to the east and the Loop to the west, Grant Park
has been Chicago's front yard since the mid-19th century. Its northwest
corner, north of Monroe Street and the Art Institute, east of Michigan Avenue,
south of Randolph Street, and west of Columbus Drive, had been Illinois
Central rail yards and parking lots until 1997, when it was made available for
development by the city as Millennium Park.[11] As of 2009, Millennium Park
trailed only Navy Pier as a Chicago tourist attraction.[12]

In 1836, a year before Chicago was incorporated,[13] the Board of Canal
Commissioners held public auctions for the city's first lots. Citizens with
the foresight to keep the lakefront as public open space convinced the
commissioners to designate the land east of Michigan Avenue between Randolph
Street and Park Row (11th Street) "Public Groundâ€”A Common to Remain Forever
Open, Clear and Free of Any Buildings, or Other Obstruction, whatever."[14]
Grant Park has been "forever open, clear and free" since, protected by
legislation that has been affirmed by four previous Illinois Supreme Court
rulings.[15][16][17] In 1839, United States Secretary of War Joel Roberts
Poinsett decommissioned the Fort Dearborn reserve and declared the land
between Randolph Street and Madison Street east of Michigan Avenue "Public
Ground forever to remain vacant of buildings".[13]

Aaron Montgomery Ward, who is known both as the inventor of mail order and the
protector of Grant Park, twice sued the city of Chicago to force it to remove
buildings and structures from Grant Park, and to keep it from building new
ones.[18][19] In 1890, arguing that Michigan Avenue property owners held
easements on the park land, Ward commenced legal actions to keep the park free
of new buildings. In 1900, the Illinois Supreme Court concluded that all
landfill east of Michigan Avenue was subject to dedications and easements.[20]
In 1909, when he sought to prevent the construction of the Field Museum of
Natural History in the center of the park, the courts affirmed his arguments
and the museum was built elsewhere.[21][22][23]

As a result, the city has what are termed the Montgomery Ward height
restrictions on buildings and structures in Grant Park; structures over 40
feet (12 m) tall are not allowed in the park, with the exception of
bandshells.[24] However, within Millennium Park, the 50-foot (15 m) _Crown
Fountain_ and the 139-foot (42 m) Jay Pritzker Pavilion were exempt from the
height restrictions, because they were classified as works of art and not
buildings or structures. Shorter structures do not run afoul of the height
restrictions. The Harris Theater, which lies between the North Pavilions, was
built mostly underground to avoid the restrictions.[25][26] The Northwest
Pavilion, tallest of the four, is three stories high; the Northeast Pavilion
is two stories, and the South Pavilions are each one story.[5]

The pavilions are named for Exelon, a Chicago-based company that generates the
electricity transmitted by its subsidiary Commonwealth Edison (ComEd).[4] The
city of Chicago has collaborated with Exelon and ComEd on a variety of
environmental projects, including the installation of solar power in
buildings, support for sustainable design and renewable energy, and furthering
educational and social awareness of green architecture in the city.[10] The
pavilions cost $7 million,[4] $5.5 million of which was donated by Exelon and
ComEd.[2]

The lead designer for the North Pavilions was Thomas H. Beeby of Hammond Beeby
Rupert Ainge Architects.[5] Beeby's designs for the North Pavilions are "in
harmony with the Harris Theater",[27] for which he was the architect as well.
The North Pavilions are along Randolph Street on either side of the theater,
which is Millennium Park's indoor performing-arts venue.[5]

The South Pavilions were designed by architect Renzo Piano of Renzo Piano
Building Workshop.[5] Piano designed the Art Institute of Chicago's Modern
Wing, which is across Monroe Street from the South Pavilions and opened in
2009. The facades of the South Pavilions are limestone and glass in order to
complement the Modern Wing, even though it was not completed until several
years after the pavilions were finished.[2] Piano also designed the Nichols
Bridgeway, which connects Millennium Park and the Art Institute, and is next
to the Southwest Pavilion.[28]

The design process for the Exelon Pavilions began in September 2001, with
construction starting in January 2004. The general contractor for all four
pavilions was Walsh Construction. The South Pavilions were completed in July
2004 and opened when Millennium Park celebrated its grand opening on July 16,
2004. The North Pavilions were not finished in July 2004, but were completed
in November of that year. All four Exelon Pavilions were officially opened to
the public on April 30, 2005.[4][5]

The North Pavilions were designed as minimalist black cubes,[7] and together
are capable of producing 16,000 kilowatt-hours (58,000 MJ) of electricity
annually.[2] The outermost layer of the exterior of each pavilion is a curtain
wall made of recycled aluminum. These walls contain specially designed "mono-
crystalline photovoltaic modules and insulated glass".[29] Convection from
radiant solar heat gain causes air to cycle within air cavities covered by the
photovoltaic modules. A "highly heat-reflective thermoplastic membrane" is
used to waterproof each roof, and helps mitigate the urban heat island
effect.[29]

The photovoltaic modules generate electricity to power much of the pavilions'
lighting.[29] The North Pavilions are the first Chicago buildings to use
building integrated photovoltaic cells, which are a solar energy system
incorporated into the building's structural elements.[10] Millennium Park's
planners claimed that the pavilions had the first electricity-generating
curtain walls in the Midwest.[4]

The Northwest Pavilion, located at 151 E. Randolph Street,[30] houses the
Millennium Park Welcome Center and an Exelon energy display.[7] It contains
the Millennium Park offices, and public restrooms.[2] The three-story
Northwest Pavilion is the largest of the four pavilions, with 6,100 square
feet (570 m2),[5] and is the only pavilion that does not provide access to the
parking garage below.[7] The Northwest Pavilion has 460 photovoltaic modules
to harness solar energy, houses recycling facilities, and its "interior
finishes and construction materials are derived from renewable resources".[2]

The Millennium Park Welcome Center in the Northwest Pavilion offers guides to
the park and wheelchairs. It houses exhibitions on parks and energy, and has
interactive displays on how the pavilions' solar panels function and on
renewable energy. There are exhibits with interactive web-based touch screens
that depict the city's use of solar energy, and a dynamic multi-screen video
presentation on electricity generation and usage. The building's atrium
includes a sculpture by Chicago-based artists Patrick McGee and Adelheid Mers
with three backlit 9-foot (2.7 m) two-way mirrors. The sculpture, titled
_Heliosphere, Biosphere, Technosphere_ , is "designed to interpret the links
between the Earth's atmosphere, the solar system and scientific
applications".[2] It is the only permanent work of art by Chicago artists
within the park.[31]

The Northeast Pavilion houses a pedestrian entrance to the Millennium Park
parking garage,[2] and provides access to the Harris Theater's rooftop
terrace.[10][30] It is at 201 E. Randolph Street, east of the theater and west
of the McDonald's Cycle Center. The pavilion's second floor has the Chicago
Shop, which offers a self-guided Millennium Park audio tour for rental and
sells official Millennium Park and Chicago souvenirs.[32] The two-story
Northeast Pavilion is the second-largest, with 4,100 square feet (380 m2) of
surface area,[5] and also has 460 photovoltaic modules to generate electricity
from sunlight.[2]

The south pavilions are east and west of the Lurie Garden along Monroe Street,
and their glass walls allow views of the garden.[4] Both of the South
Pavilions provide access to the parking garage below the park. The 550-square-
foot (51 m2) Southwest Pavilion is the smallest of the four pavilions,[5] and
has the least number of photovoltaic modules with 16 on its roof.[2] It is
west of the garden and east of the Nichols Bridgeway. The Southeast Pavilion
is east of the garden, has the second smallest area at 750 square feet (70
m2),[5] and has 24 rooftop photovoltaic modules. Together these two pavilions
are capable of producing 3,840 kilowatt-hours (13,800 MJ) of electricity
annually.[2]

Pulitzer Prize-winning _Chicago Tribune_ architecture critic Blair Kamin
praised the decision to have architects design the pavilions as an "inspired
stroke", speculating that if their designs had been left to contractors,
visitors to Millennium Park could have instead seen unimpressive "blunt
utilitarian huts".[4] Kamin was pleased with Piano's South Pavilions,
describing them as "minor modernist jewels, almost house-like".[4] He lauded
the way their limestone walls complement the transparent glass by way of
contrast, and noted that they anticipated Piano's then-forthcoming addition to
the Art Institute of Chicago Building. Kamin gave the South Pavilions a rating
of three stars out of a possible four, or "very good".[4]

Kamin was less pleased with Beeby's North Pavilions, which he described as
"nearly all black and impenetrable" and compared to Darth Vader's helmet.[4]
He acknowledged the pavilions' innovative technology, and their "urban design
function" as wings for the Harris Theater, which Kamin felt "allows the
theater to better stand up to the Frank Gehry-designed Pritzker Pavilion to
its south".[4] Because they were not finished when he wrote his review in July
2004, Kamin did not give the North Pavilions an overall star rating; he did
express the hope that they would have a more pleasant appearance once
completed.[4]

The pavilions have been recognized for their innovative use of renewable
energy and green design. In 2005, the North Pavilions received the Leadership
in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) silver rating from the United States
Green Building Council.[10][33] They received a Technology Award Honorable
Mention in the category of "Alternative and/or Renewable Energy Use â€“ New
Construction" from the American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE).[10][34] The United States Department of
Energy has recognized all the pavilions as part of its Million Solar Roofs
Initiative. In 2005 Chicago ranked fourth among U.S. cities in solar
installations;[2] the completion of the Exelon Pavilions took the city to a
total of 1 MW of installed photovoltaic systems.[35] The pavilions together
generate 19,840 kilowatt-hours (71,400 MJ) of electricity annually,[2] worth
$2,353 per year at 2010 average Illinois electricity prices.[3] According to
the City of Chicago, this is enough energy to power the equivalent of 14
Energy Star-rated efficient houses in Chicago.[7]

