**Faccenda Group** is a privately owned UK business established in 1962 by
Robin Faccenda, which supplies fresh poultry products.[1]

In 2018, Faccenda and Cargill opened a joint venture to take over their UK
fresh poultry businesses, named Avara Foods, employing 6,000 people.[2]

The group is owned by Hillesden Investments Ltd.,[3] growing the business
through acquisitions of Hinton Poultry, Perry Poultry and Webbs Country Foods,
with an annual turnover of around £300m with 2,500 employees in 2005,[4]
growing to a turnover of £365 million with a profit of £5 million in 2013.[5]
In 2007-2008 the Faccenda Group had suffered a loss of £5 million.[6]

In 2008 it was the second-largest chicken processing company in the UK,[7]
capable of processing 2 million chickens per week.[8]

Robin Faccenda, Chairman of the Faccenda Group, has invested £300,000 in a new
student centre at Harper Adams, which will bear his name when it opens in
2010. A further £200,000 will fund a long-term programme of student financial
support.,[9]

In 2014, Robin Faccenda and his family were listed by Farmers Weekly as the
richest within the UK poultry industry.[10]

In 2017, Faccenda and Cargill announced a joint venture to take over their UK
fresh poultry businesses.[11][12] In 2018, following agreement by the
Competition and Markets Authority, they announced the name of the joint
venture as Avara Foods, employing 6,000 people.[2]

The purchase of the loss making Webbs Country Foods in December 2000, required
the closure of the most underinvested site at the Lymington, Hampshire factory
with a loss of 500 jobs.[13][14] However, 850 jobs were saved across the
remaining 3 production facilities.[ _citation needed_ ]

As part of a major business consolidation exercise, Faccenda closed the
factory in Sutton Benger, Wiltshire in 2008, with the loss of 450 jobs, moving
all production to the Brackley site.[7][15][16] This exercise also included
the investment of £3 million in its factory in Brackley,[17] and £2 million to
its factories in Hortonwood (north Telford) and Dudley and the creation of 100
new jobs - some transferring from the Sutton Benger site.[18][19][20][21][22]

In 2012 Faccenda bought Cranberry Foods, a turkey business.[5]

In 2002, the company was fined £75,000 for polluting the River Avon from its
Sutton Benger plant.[23][24] It was also fined a further £14,000 after
17-year-old worker lost his little finger and ring finger after he reached
into a machine through a gap in the guarding mesh.[25]

In 2003, police arrested 20 Brazilians working illegally at the plant in
2003.[26]

The Environment Agency found in 2006 that the smell from the Brackley plant
fell outside limits under the Pollution Prevention and Control
regulations.[23][27]

In 2009, the company was fined £5000 under the Environmental Protection Act
for incorrectly disposing of waste at Lyneham Farm, near Chippenham.[23] The
court heard that, in April 2008, a routine visit to the poultry unit by
Environment Agency inspectors found that hazardous waste was being bought from
other sites and incorrectly stored. A further inspection in October showed
that the hazardous waste, including fluorescent light tubes, was still being
stored, mixed with other waste and then taken to a waste transfer site. The
Environment Agency prosecutor told the court: "The defendant company
consistently failed to comply with the advice given to it by the Environment
Agency and tried to dispose of hazardous waste, despite being warned on
previous occasions about the illegal mixing, storing and transportation of
hazardous wastes."[28]

A case brought by Faccenda against a former sales manager, Faccenda Chicken v
Fowler [1986], is a key legal case in confidentiality and trade
secrets.[29][30]

