The **Falkland Islands** (/ˈfɔːlklənd/; Spanish: _Islas Malvinas_ , pronounced
[ˈislas malˈβinas]) is an archipelago in the South Atlantic Ocean on the
Patagonian Shelf. The principal islands are about 300 miles (483 kilometres)
east of South America's southern Patagonian coast, and about 752 miles (1,210
kilometres) from the northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula, at a latitude of
about 52°S. The archipelago, with an area of 4,700 square miles (12,000 square
kilometres), comprises East Falkland, West Falkland and 776 smaller islands.
As a British overseas territory, the Falklands have internal self-governance,
and the United Kingdom takes responsibility for their defence and foreign
affairs. The Falkland Islands' capital is Stanley on East Falkland.

Controversy exists over the Falklands' discovery and subsequent colonisation
by Europeans. At various times, the islands have had French, British, Spanish,
and Argentine settlements. Britain reasserted its rule in 1833, although
Argentina maintains its claim to the islands. In April 1982, Argentine forces
occupied the islands. British administration was restored two months later at
the end of the Falklands War. Almost all Falklanders favour the archipelago
remaining a UK overseas territory. Its sovereignty status is part of an
ongoing dispute between Argentina and the United Kingdom.

The population (3,398 inhabitants in 2016)[7] primarily consists of native-
born Falkland Islanders, the majority of British descent. Other ethnicities
include French, Gibraltarian and Scandinavian. Immigration from the United
Kingdom, the South Atlantic island of Saint Helena, and Chile has reversed a
population decline. The predominant (and official) language is English. Under
the British Nationality (Falkland Islands) Act 1983, Falkland Islanders are
British citizens.

The islands lie on the boundary of the subantarctic oceanic and tundra climate
zones, and both major islands have mountain ranges reaching 2,300 feet (700
m). They are home to large bird populations, although many no longer breed on
the main islands because of competition from introduced species. Major
economic activities include fishing, tourism and sheep farming, with an
emphasis on high-quality wool exports. Oil exploration, licensed by the
Falkland Islands Government, remains controversial as a result of maritime
disputes with Argentina.

The name "Falkland Islands" comes from Falkland Sound, the strait that
separates the two main islands.[8] The name "Falkland" was applied to the
channel by John Strong, captain of an English expedition which landed on the
islands in 1690. Strong named the strait in honour of Anthony Cary, 5th
Viscount of Falkland, the Treasurer of the Navy who sponsored his journey.[9]
The Viscount's title originates from the town of Falkland, Scotland—the town's
name likely comes from a Gaelic term referring to an "enclosure" ( _lann_
),[A] but it could less plausibly be from the Anglo-Saxon term "folkland"
(land held by folk-right).[11] The name "Falklands" was not applied to the
islands until 1765, when British captain John Byron of the Royal Navy, claimed
them for King George III as "Falkland's Islands".[12] The term "Falklands" is
a standard abbreviation used to refer to the islands.

The Spanish name for the archipelago, _Islas Malvinas_ , derives from the
French _Îles Malouines_ —the name given to the islands by French explorer
Louis-Antoine de Bougainville in 1764.[13] Bougainville, who founded the
islands' first settlement, named the area after the port of Saint-Malo (the
point of departure for his ships and colonists).[14] The port, located in the
Brittany region of western France, was named after St. Malo (or Maclou), the
Christian evangelist who founded the city.[15]

At the twentieth session of the United Nations General Assembly, the Fourth
Committee determined that, in all languages other than Spanish, all UN
documentation would designate the territory as _Falkland Islands (Malvinas)_.
In Spanish, the territory was designated as _Islas Malvinas (Falkland
Islands)_.[16] The nomenclature used by the United Nations for statistical
processing purposes is _Falkland Islands (Malvinas)_.[17]

Although Fuegians from Patagonia may have visited the Falkland Islands in
prehistoric times,[18] the islands were uninhabited when Europeans first
discovered them.[19] Claims of discovery date back to the 16th century, but no
consensus exists on whether early explorers discovered the Falklands or other
islands in the South Atlantic.[20][21][B] The first recorded landing on the
islands is attributed to English captain John Strong, who, en route to Peru's
and Chile's littoral in 1690, discovered the Falkland Sound and noted the
islands' water and game.[23]

The Falklands remained uninhabited until the 1764 establishment of Port Louis
on East Falkland by French captain Louis Antoine de Bougainville, and the 1766
foundation of Port Egmont on Saunders Island by British captain John
MacBride.[C] Whether or not the settlements were aware of each other's
existence is debated by historians.[26] In 1766, France surrendered its claim
on the Falklands to Spain, which renamed the French colony Puerto Soledad the
following year.[27] Problems began when Spain discovered and captured Port
Egmont in 1770. War was narrowly avoided by its restitution to Britain in
1771.[28]

Both the British and Spanish settlements coexisted in the archipelago until
1774, when Britain's new economic and strategic considerations led it to
voluntarily withdraw from the islands, leaving a plaque claiming the Falklands
for King George III.[29] Spain's Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata became the
only governmental presence in the territory. West Falkland was left abandoned,
and Puerto Soledad became mostly a prison camp.[30] Amid the British invasions
of the Río de la Plata during the Napoleonic Wars in Europe, the islands'
governor evacuated the archipelago in 1806; Spain's remaining colonial
garrison followed suit in 1811, except for gauchos and fishermen who remained
voluntarily.[30]

Thereafter, the archipelago was visited only by fishing ships; its political
status was undisputed until 1820, when Colonel David Jewett, an American
privateer working for the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata, informed
anchored ships about Buenos Aires' 1816 claim to Spain's territories in the
South Atlantic.[31][D] Since the islands had no permanent inhabitants, in 1823
Buenos Aires granted German-born merchant Luis Vernet permission to conduct
fishing activities and exploit feral cattle in the archipelago.[E] Vernet
settled at the ruins of Puerto Soledad in 1826, and accumulated resources on
the islands until the venture was secure enough to bring settlers and form a
permanent colony.[35] Buenos Aires named Vernet military and civil commander
of the islands in 1829,[36] and he attempted to regulate sealing to stop the
activities of foreign whalers and sealers.[30] Vernet's venture lasted until a
dispute over fishing and hunting rights led to a raid by the American warship
USS _Lexington_ in 1831,[37][F] when United States Navy commander Silas Duncan
declared the dissolution of the island's government.[38]

Buenos Aires attempted to retain influence over the settlement by installing a
garrison, but a mutiny in 1832 was followed the next year by the arrival of
British forces who reasserted Britain's rule.[39] The Argentine Confederation
(headed by Buenos Aires Governor Juan Manuel de Rosas) protested against
Britain's actions,[40][G] and Argentine governments have continued since then
to register official protests against Britain.[43][H] The British troops
departed after completing their mission, leaving the area without formal
government.[45] Vernet's deputy, the Scotsman Matthew Brisbane, returned to
the islands that year to restore the business, but his efforts ended after,
amid unrest at Port Louis, gaucho Antonio Rivero led a group of dissatisfied
individuals to murder Brisbane and the settlement's senior leaders; survivors
hid in a cave on a nearby island until the British returned and restored
order.[45] In 1840, the Falklands became a Crown colony, and Scottish settlers
subsequently established an official pastoral community.[46] Four years later,
nearly everyone relocated to Port Jackson, considered a better location for
government, and merchant Samuel Lafone began a venture to encourage British
colonisation.[47]

Stanley, as Port Jackson was soon renamed, officially became the seat of
government in 1845.[48] Early in its history, Stanley had a negative
reputation due to cargo-shipping losses; only in emergencies would ships
rounding Cape Horn stop at the port.[49] Nevertheless, the Falklands'
geographic location proved ideal for ship repairs and the "Wrecking Trade",
the business of selling and buying shipwrecks and their cargoes.[50] Aside
from this trade, commercial interest in the archipelago was minimal due to the
low-value hides of the feral cattle roaming the pastures. Economic growth
began only after the Falkland Islands Company, which bought out Lafone's
failing enterprise in 1851,[I] successfully introduced Cheviot sheep for wool
farming, spurring other farms to follow suit.[52] The high cost of importing
materials, combined with the shortage of labour and consequent high wages,
meant the ship repair trade became uncompetitive. After 1870, it declined as
the replacement of sail ships by steamships was accelerated by the low cost of
coal in South America; by 1914, with the opening of the Panama Canal, the
trade effectively ended.[53] In 1881, the Falkland Islands became financially
independent of Britain.[48] For more than a century, the Falkland Islands
Company dominated the trade and employment of the archipelago; in addition, it
owned most housing in Stanley, which greatly benefited from the wool trade
with the UK.[52]

In the first half of the 20th century, the Falklands served an important role
in Britain's territorial claims to subantarctic islands and a section of
Antarctica. The Falklands governed these territories as the Falkland Islands
Dependencies starting in 1908, and retained them until their dissolution in
1985.[54] The Falklands also played a minor role in the two world wars as a
military base aiding control of the South Atlantic. In the First World War
Battle of the Falkland Islands in December 1914, a Royal Navy fleet defeated
an Imperial German squadron. In the Second World War, following the December
1939 Battle of the River Plate, the battle-damaged HMS _Exeter_ steamed to the
Falklands for repairs.[19] In 1942, a battalion en route to India was
redeployed to the Falklands as a garrison amid fears of a Japanese seizure of
the archipelago.[55] After the war ended, the Falklands economy was affected
by declining wool prices and the political uncertainty resulting from the
revived sovereignty dispute between the United Kingdom and Argentina.[49]

Simmering tensions between the UK and Argentina increased during the second
half of the century, when Argentine President Juan Perón asserted sovereignty
over the archipelago.[56] The sovereignty dispute intensified during the
1960s, shortly after the United Nations passed a resolution on decolonisation
which Argentina interpreted as favourable to its position.[57] In 1965, the UN
General Assembly passed Resolution 2065, calling for both states to conduct
bilateral negotiations to reach a peaceful settlement of the dispute.[57] From
1966 until 1968, the UK confidentially discussed with Argentina the transfer
of the Falklands, assuming its judgement would be accepted by the
islanders.[58] An agreement on trade ties between the archipelago and the
mainland was reached in 1971 and, consequently, Argentina built a temporary
airfield at Stanley in 1972.[48] Nonetheless, Falklander dissent, as expressed
by their strong lobby in the UK Parliament, and tensions between the UK and
Argentina effectively limited sovereignty negotiations until 1977.[59]

Concerned at the expense of maintaining the Falkland Islands in an era of
budget cuts, the UK again considered transferring sovereignty to Argentina in
the early Thatcher government.[60] Substantive sovereignty talks again ended
by 1981, and the dispute escalated with passing time.[61] In April 1982, the
disagreement became an armed conflict when Argentina invaded the Falklands and
other British territories in the South Atlantic, briefly occupying them until
a UK expeditionary force retook the territories in June.[62] After the war,
the United Kingdom expanded its military presence, building RAF Mount Pleasant
and increasing the size of its garrison.[63] The war also left some 117
minefields containing nearly 20,000 mines of various types, including anti-
vehicle and anti-personnel mines.[64] Due to the large number of deminer
casualties, initial attempts to clear the mines ceased in 1983.[64][J]

Based on Lord Shackleton's recommendations, the Falklands diversified from a
sheep-based monoculture into an economy of tourism and, with the establishment
of the Falklands Exclusive Economic Zone, fisheries.[66][K] The road network
was also made more extensive, and the construction of RAF Mount Pleasant
allowed access to long haul flights.[66] Oil exploration also began, with
indications of possible commercially exploitable deposits in the Falklands
basin.[67] Landmine clearance work restarted in 2009, in accordance with the
UK's obligations under the Ottawa Treaty, and Sapper Hill Corral was cleared
of mines in 2012, allowing access to an important historical landmark for the
first time in 30 years.[68][69] Argentina and the UK re-established diplomatic
relations in 1990; relations have since deteriorated as neither has agreed on
the terms of future sovereignty discussions.[70] Disputes between the
governments have led "some analysts [to] predict a growing conflict of
interest between Argentina and Great Britain ... because of the recent
expansion of the fishing industry in the waters surrounding the
Falklands".[71]

The Falkland Islands are a self-governing British Overseas Territory.[72]
Under the 2009 Constitution, the islands have full internal self-government;
the UK is responsible for foreign affairs, retaining the power "to protect UK
interests and to ensure the overall good governance of the territory".[73] The
Monarch of the United Kingdom is the head of state, and executive authority is
exercised on the monarch's behalf by the Governor, who appoints the islands'
Chief Executive on the advice of members of the Legislative Assembly.[74] Both
the Governor and the Chief Executive serve as the head of government.[75]

Governor Nigel Phillips was appointed in September 2017[76] and Chief
Executive Barry Rowland was appointed in October 2016.[77] The UK minister
responsible for the Falkland Islands since 2019, Christopher Pincher,
administers British foreign policy regarding the islands.[78]

The Governor acts on the advice of the islands' Executive Council, composed of
the Chief Executive, the Director of Finance and three elected members of the
Legislative Assembly (with the Governor as chairman).[74] The Legislative
Assembly, a unicameral legislature, consists of the Chief Executive, the
Director of Finance and eight members (five from Stanley and three from Camp)
elected to four-year terms by universal suffrage.[74] All politicians in the
Falkland Islands are independent; no political parties exist on the
islands.[79] Since the 2013 general election, members of the Legislative
Assembly have received a salary and are expected to work full-time and give up
all previously held jobs or business interests.[80]

As a territory of the United Kingdom, the Falklands are part of the overseas
countries and territories of the European Union.[81] The islands' judicial
system, overseen by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, is largely based on
English law,[82] and the constitution binds the territory to the principles of
the European Convention on Human Rights.[73] Residents have the right of
appeal to the European Court of Human Rights and the Privy Council.[83][84]
Law enforcement is the responsibility of the Royal Falkland Islands Police
(RFIP),[82] and military defence of the islands is provided by the United
Kingdom.[85] A British military garrison is stationed on the islands, and the
Falkland Islands government funds an additional company-sized light infantry
Falkland Islands Defence Force.[86] The Falklands claim an exclusive economic
zone (EEZ) extending 200 nautical miles (370 km) from its coastal baselines,
based on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea; this zone
overlaps with the EEZ of Argentina.[87]

The United Kingdom and Argentina both claim the Falkland Islands. The UK bases
its position on its continuous administration of the islands since 1833 and
the islanders' "right to self-determination as set out in the UN
Charter".[88][89][90] Argentina's position is that it acquired the Falklands
from Spain when it achieved independence in 1816, and that, in 1833, the UK
expelled Argentine authorities and settlers from the islands with a threat of
"greater force" and, afterwards, barred Argentines from resettling the
islands.[91][92]

In 2009, the British prime minister, Gordon Brown, had a meeting with the
Argentine president, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, and said that there would
be no further talks over the sovereignty of the Falklands.[93] In March 2013,
the Falkland Islands held a referendum on its political status: 99.8% of
voters favoured remaining a British overseas territory.[94][95] Argentina does
not recognise the Falkland Islanders as a partner in negotiations.[96][97][91]

The Falkland Islands have a land area of 4,700 square miles (12,000 km2) and a
coastline estimated at 800 miles (1,300 km).[98] The archipelago consists of
two main islands, West Falkland and East Falkland, and about 776 smaller
islands.[99] The islands are predominantly mountainous and hilly,[100] with
the major exception being the depressed plains of Lafonia (a peninsula forming
the southern part of East Falkland).[101] The Falklands consists of
continental crust fragments resulting from the break-up of Gondwana and the
opening of the South Atlantic that began 130 million years ago. The islands
are located in the South Atlantic Ocean, on the Patagonian Shelf, about 300
miles (480 km) east of Patagonia in southern Argentina.[102]

The Falklands' approximate location is latitude 51°40′ – 53°00′ S and
longitude 57°40′ – 62°00′ W.[103] The archipelago's two main islands are
separated by the Falkland Sound,[104] and its deep coastal indentations form
natural harbours.[105] East Falkland houses Stanley (the capital and largest
settlement),[103] the UK military base at RAF Mount Pleasant, and the
archipelago's highest point: Mount Usborne, at 2,313 feet (705 m).[104]
Outside of these significant settlements is the area colloquially known as
"Camp", which is derived from the Spanish term for countryside ( _Campo_
).[106]

The climate of the islands is cold, windy and humid maritime.[102] Variability
of daily weather is typical throughout the archipelago.[107] Rainfall is
common over half of the year, averaging 610 millimetres (24 in) in Stanley,
and sporadic light snowfall occurs nearly all year.[100] The temperature has
historically stayed between 21.1 and −11.1 °C (70.0 and 12.0 °F) in Stanley,
with mean monthly temperatures varying from 9 °C (48 °F) early in the year to
−1 °C (30 °F) in July.[107] Strong westerly winds and cloudy skies are
common.[100] Although numerous storms are recorded each month, conditions are
normally calm.[107]

The Falkland Islands are a biogeographical part of the mild Antarctic
zone,[108] with strong connections to the flora and fauna of Patagonia in
mainland South America.[109] Land birds make up most of the Falklands'
avifauna; 63 species breed on the islands, including 16 endemic species.[110]
There is also abundant arthropod diversity on the islands.[111] The Falklands'
flora consists of 163 native vascular species.[112] The islands' only native
terrestrial mammal, the warrah, was hunted to extinction by European
settlers.[113]

The islands are frequented by marine mammals, such as the southern elephant
seal and the South American fur seal, and various types of cetaceans; offshore
islands house the rare striated caracara. There are also five different
penguin species and a few of the largest albatross colonies on the
planet.[114] Endemic fish around the islands are primarily from the genus
_Galaxias_.[111] The Falklands are treeless and have a wind-resistant
vegetation predominantly composed of a variety of dwarf shrubs.[115]

Virtually the entire land area of the islands is used as pasture for
sheep.[116] Introduced species include reindeer, hares, rabbits, Patagonian
foxes, brown rats and cats.[117] Several of these species have harmed native
flora and fauna, so the government has tried to contain, remove or exterminate
foxes, rabbits and rats. Endemic land animals have been the most affected by
introduced species.[118] The extent of human impact on the Falklands is
unclear, since there is little long-term data on habitat change.[109]

The economy of the Falkland Islands is ranked the 222nd largest out of 229 in
the world by GDP (PPP), but ranks 5th worldwide by GDP (PPP) per capita.[120]
The unemployment rate was 1% in 2016, and inflation was calculated at 1.4% in
2014.[116] Based on 2010 data[ _out of date_ ], the islands have a high Human
Development Index of 0.874[4] and a moderate Gini coefficient for income
inequality of 34.17.[3] The local currency is the Falkland Islands pound,
which is pegged to the British pound sterling.[121]

Economic development was advanced by ship resupplying and sheep farming for
high-quality wool.[122] The main sheep breeds in the Falkland Islands are
Polwarth and Corriedale.[123] During the 1980s, although ranch under-
investment and the use of synthetic fibres damaged the sheep-farming sector,
the government secured a major revenue stream by the establishment of an
exclusive economic zone and the sale of fishing licences to "anybody wishing
to fish within this zone".[124] Since the end of the Falklands War in 1982,
the islands' economic activity has increasingly focused on oil field
exploration and tourism.[125]

The port settlement of Stanley has regained the islands' economic focus, with
an increase in population as workers migrate from Camp.[126] Fear of
dependence on fishing licences and threats from overfishing, illegal fishing
and fish market price fluctuations have increased interest in oil drilling as
an alternative source of revenue; exploration efforts have yet to find
"exploitable reserves".[119] Development projects in education and sports have
been funded by the Falklands government, without aid from the United
Kingdom.[124]

The primary sector of the economy accounts for most of the Falkland Islands'
gross domestic product, with the fishing industry alone contributing between
50% and 60% of annual GDP; agriculture also contributes significantly to GDP
and employs about a tenth of the population.[127] A little over a quarter of
the workforce serves the Falkland Islands government, making it the
archipelago's largest employer.[128] Tourism, part of the service economy, has
been spurred by increased interest in Antarctic exploration and the creation
of direct air links with the United Kingdom and South America.[129] Tourists,
mostly cruise ship passengers, are attracted by the archipelago's wildlife and
environment, as well as activities such as fishing and wreck diving; the
majority find accommodation in Stanley.[130] The islands' major exports
include wool, hides, venison, fish and squid; its main imports include fuel,
building materials and clothing.[116]

The Falkland Islands population is homogeneous, mostly descended from Scottish
and Welsh immigrants who settled in the territory after 1833.[131] The
Falkland-born population are also descended from English and French people,
Gibraltarians, Scandinavians and South Americans. The 2016 census indicated
that 43% of residents were born on the archipelago, with foreign-born
residents assimilated into local culture. The legal term for the right of
residence is "belonging to the islands". [132][133] In 1983, full British
citizenship was given to Falkland Islanders under the British Nationality
(Falkland Islands) Act.[131]

A significant population decline affected the archipelago in the twentieth
century, with many young islanders moving overseas in search of education, a
modern lifestyle, and better job opportunities,[134] particularly to the
British city of Southampton, which came to be known in the islands as "Stanley
north".[135] In recent years, the islands' population decline has reduced,
thanks to immigrants from the United Kingdom, Saint Helena, and Chile.[136] In
the 2012 census, a majority of residents listed their nationality as Falkland
Islander (59 percent), followed by British (29 percent), Saint Helenian (9.8
percent), and Chilean (5.4 percent).[137] A small number of Argentines also
live on the islands.[138]

The Falkland Islands have a low population density.[139] According to the 2012
census, the average daily population of the Falklands was 2,932, excluding
military personnel serving in the archipelago and their dependents.[L] A 2012
report counted 1,300 uniformed personnel and 50 British Ministry of Defence
civil servants present in the Falklands.[128] Stanley (with 2,121 residents)
is the most-populous location on the archipelago, followed by Mount Pleasant
(369 residents, primarily air-base contractors) and Camp (351 residents).[137]
The islands' age distribution is skewed towards working age (20–60). Males
outnumber females (53 to 47 percent), and this discrepancy is most prominent
in the 20–60 age group.[132]

In the 2012 census, most islanders identified themselves as Christian (66
percent), followed by those with no religious affiliation (32 percent). The
remaining 2 percent identified as adherents of other faiths, including
Bahá'í,[140] Buddhism,[141] and Islam.[142][137] The main Christian
denominations are Anglicanism and other Protestantism, and Roman
Catholicism.[143]

Education in the Falkland Islands, which follows England's system, is free and
compulsory for residents aged between 5 and 16 years.[144] Primary education
is available at Stanley, RAF Mount Pleasant (for children of service
personnel) and a number of rural settlements. Secondary education is only
available in Stanley, which offers boarding facilities and 12 subjects to
General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE) level. Students aged 16 or
older may study at colleges in England for their GCE Advanced Level or
vocational qualifications. The Falkland Islands government pays for older
students to attend institutions of higher education, usually in the United
Kingdom.[144]

Falklands culture is based on the cultural traditions of its British settlers.
It has also been influenced by Hispanic South America.[136] Falklanders still
use some terms and place names from the former Gaucho inhabitants.[145] The
Falklands' predominant and official language is English, with the foremost
dialect being British English; nonetheless, some inhabitants also speak
Spanish.[136] According to naturalist Will Wagstaff, "the Falkland Islands are
a very social place, and stopping for a chat is a way of life".[145]

The islands have two weekly newspapers: _Teaberry Express_ and _The Penguin
News_ ,[146] and television and radio broadcasts generally feature programming
from the United Kingdom.[136] Wagstaff describes local cuisine as "very
British in character with much use made of the homegrown vegetables, local
lamb, mutton, beef, and fish". Common between meals are "home made cakes and
biscuits with tea or coffee".[147] Social activities are, according to
Wagstaff, "typical of that of a small British town with a variety of clubs and
organisations covering many aspects of community life".[148]

**Lat. and Long. 51°42′S 57°51′W﻿ / ﻿51.700°S 57.850°W﻿ / -51.700; -57.850
(Stanley)**

_Click on a coloured area to see an article about English in that country or
region_

Coordinates: 51°41′S 59°10′W﻿ / ﻿51.683°S 59.167°W﻿ / -51.683; -59.167

