**Fandango Media, LLC** is an American ticketing company that sells movie
tickets via their website as well as through their mobile app.

Industry revenue increased rapidly for several years after the company's
formation.[ _citation needed_ ] However, as the Internet grew in popularity,
small and medium-sized movie-theater chains began to offer independent ticket
sale capabilities through their own websites. In addition, a new paradigm of
moviegoers printing their own tickets at home (with barcodes to be scanned at
the theater) emerged, in services offered by **PrintTixUSA** and by point-of-
sale software vendor operated websites like " **ticketmakers.com** " (and
eventually Fandango itself). Finally, an overall slump in moviegoing continued
into the 2000s, as home theaters, DVDs, and high definition televisions
proliferated in average households, turning their homes into a preferred place
to screen films.

On April 11, 2007, Comcast acquired Fandango, with plans to integrate it into
a new entertainment website called " **Fancast.com** ," set to launch the
summer of 2007.[5] In June 2008, the domain Movies.com was acquired from
Disney.[6] With Comcast's purchase of a majority stake in NBCUniversal in
January 2011 (full ownership in 2013), Fandango and all other Comcast media
assets were merged into the company.

In March 2012, Fandango announced a partnership with Yahoo! Movies, becoming
the official online and mobile ticketer for registered users of the Yahoo!
service.[7] That October, Paul Yanover was named President of Fandango.[8]

Fandango made its first international acquisition in September 2015 when it
bought Brazilian ticketing company Ingresso, which provides ticketing to a
variety of Brazilian entertainment events, including the biannual Rock in Rio
festival.[9]

On January 29, 2016, Fandango announced its acquisition of M-GO,[10] a joint
venture between Technicolor SA and DreamWorks Animation (NBCUniversal acquired
the latter company three months later)[11] which it would later rebrand as
"FandangoNOW".[12]

In February of that same year Fandango announced its acquisition of Flixster
and Rotten Tomatoes from Time Warner's Warner Bros. Entertainment. As part of
the deal, Warner Bros. would become a 30% shareholder of the combined Fandango
company.[13][14]

In December 2016, Fandango Media purchased Cinepapaya, a Peru-based website
for purchasing movie tickets, for an undisclosed amount.[15]

Fandango charges a premium to use its services, ranging from 75Â¢ to $2.50 (the
additional surcharge for phone orders), which reserves a ticket to be printed
out upon arrival at a movie theater, thereby avoiding lines. Initially,
seating was promised for sold-out shows, but this feature was discontinued for
most theaters, as not all were equipped to handle reserved seating and will
call lines. With ticket prices in many areas exceeding US$10.00, purchasing
tickets through Fandango and other ticketing websites can make movie-going an
expensive proposition; however, procuring tickets to movies on their opening
days by conventional means may be inconvenient and difficult (especially in
large metropolitan areas) without utilizing services like Fandango.

Fandango's advertisements play before previews at participating movie-theater
chains and feature lunch bag puppets telling various one or two-line jokes and
riddles centering on the company's name. The company also produced an
advertising segment that is based on the song, "We are the World".

Fandango's website also offers exclusive film clips, trailers, celebrity
interviews, reviews by users, movie descriptions, and some web-based games to
their members.

As of March 5, 2015, Fandango provides customers with memberships the ability
to refund or exchange their orders up to 2 hours before the showtime of their
film.

Fandango's Android app was listed among Techlands 50 Best Android Applications
for 2013.[16]

Fandango is one of three major online advance movie ticket sale sites, along
with MovieTickets.com and Atom Tickets. Before being acquired by Comcast in
April 2007, Fandango was privately owned, with the major stakeholder being the
second largest movie-theater chain in the U.S., Regal Entertainment Group,
including the United Artists and Hoyts theater chains. Along with other
partners, Regal founded Fandango partly to prevent the older MovieTickets.com
from establishing a monopoly on phone and online ticketing services.
(MovieTickets.com was publicly owned and traded under the stock symbol HOLL.
It was acquired by Fandango in 2017.[17]) It's advertising agency reportedly
decided on its name because it sounded "fun, kinetic and smart," "easily
pronounce[d] and remember[ed]--even though it really has nothing to do with
movies."[18]

Mergers of movie chains have complicated matters regarding which company
provides online ticketing for a particular chain. Upon Regal's acquisition of
Consolidated Theatres, that chain was under contract to MovieTickets.com; as
such Fandango does not ticket those Regal theaters. On the other hand, Regal's
acquisition of the Hoyts chain resulted in Fandango taking over their online
ticketing.

Prior to 2012, Fandango did not provide online ticketing for many AMC
Theatres. However, it provided online ticketing for those AMC Theatres
originally part of the Loews Cineplex Entertainment chain, due to contractual
obligations in place prior to the 2005 merger of the two movie chains.[19]
Loews had previously attempted to break the contract in 2002 under pressure of
bankruptcy and from (then) AOL Moviefone and its partner, Loews' Cineplex
subsidiary; Fandango successfully sued both Loews and Moviefone and retained
Loews' business.[20] As of February 8, 2012, Fandango began providing
ticketing for all AMC Theatres in the US,[21] after which MovieTickets.com's
fellow shareholders sued AMC for breach of contract.[22] AMC and
MovieTickets.com settled in 2013, with an agreement that the theater chain's
online ticketing would be available on both Fandango and MovieTickets.com.[23]

In May 2012, Fandango announced a partnership with Moviefone, former partner
of MovieTickets.com.[24][25]

Atom Tickets, a movie ticketing app and website that was launched in 2014, has
been called a "serious competitor" for Fandango.[26][27]

In July 2009, it was revealed that Fandango along with other websites,
including buy.com and Orbitz, were linked with controversial Web loyalty
programs, also known as post-transaction marketers. Fandango reportedly gave
access to their customers' credit cards to the third party.[28]

The company held a trademark dispute of the name in December 2013 when WWE
tried to trademark it for professional wrestler Johnny Curtis.[29]

In August 2014, the Federal Trade Commission ("FTC") approved a final orders
settling charges against Fandango for misrepresenting to the public the
security of their mobile app and also for failing to protect the transmission
of their customers' sensitive personal information.[30] The Fandango mobile
app assured consumers, during checkout, that their credit card information was
stored and transmitted securely.[31] The FTC claims against Fandango focused
on failures relating to both the implementation and testing of its Secure
Sockets Layer "SSL" certificates for 4 years following the launch of the
mobile app in March 2009. According to the FTC, Fandango commissioned security
audits in 2011, but the audits were limited in scope and did not include a
review of the security of the app's transmission of information. It was also
alleged that Fandango did not implement effective channels for security
complaints, and instead relied on its general customer service system to
handle security vulnerability reporting.[32]

In October 2015, FiveThirtyEight published a story and podcast calling
Fandango's metrics on user ratings into question.[33][34] The investigation
noted that due to how the site calculates ratings it was rare for a movie to
ever get below an overall rating of three stars.[35] The problem seemingly
extended from Fandango's habit of rounding ratings up to the nearest half.[36]
Fandango, in response, noted that this was a glitch it was working to
repair.[36] Nevertheless, Gizmodo cited the study after Fandango announced the
purchase of Rotten Tomatoes over fears that the purchase would "ruin" the
site.[37]

In December 2017 Fandango received hundreds of complaints regarding its
delivery of _Star Wars: The Last Jedi_ tickets. Issues began within hours of
advanced sales becoming available for the new Star Wars film, with customers
complaining of long wait times and website glitches as Forbes reported.[38]
Troubles for the company continued as many complained that they had paid for
tickets which they never received, including YouTube channel Red Letter Media,
who referenced the complaint in their _The Last Jedi_ review multiple times.
Customers found little to no support from Fandango's customer relations team
who ignored complaints whilst continuing to take payments.

In early 2016, Fandango acquired the movie streaming service M-GO.[10]
Fandango re-branded M-GO to FandangoNow (stylized as FandangoNOW).[12]
FandangoNow is compatible with both UltraViolet and Movies Anywhere, digital
rights lockers for many large film studios.[40] FandangoNOW is the primary
digital film service for Roku, and this includes a shortcut to the service on
Roku's remote controls, along with prime placement on Roku's home menus and
search services.

