The **Fernald Feed Materials Production Center** (commonly referred to simply
as **Fernald** or later **NLO** ) is a Superfund site located within Crosby
Township in Hamilton County, Ohio, as well as Ross Township in Butler County,
Ohio.[1] It was a uranium processing facility located near the rural town of
New Baltimore, about 20 miles (32 km) northwest of Cincinnati, which
fabricated uranium fuel cores for the U.S. nuclear weapons production complex
from 1951 to 1989. During that time, the plant produced 170,000 metric tons
uranium (MTU) of metal products and 35,000 MTU of intermediate compounds, such
as uranium trioxide and uranium tetrafluoride.

Fernald came under criticism in 1984 when it was learned that the plant was
releasing millions of pounds of uranium dust into the atmosphere, causing
major radioactive contamination of the surrounding areas.[2][3]

In 1948 the Atomic Energy Commission, predecessor to the U.S. Department of
Energy, established "a large scale integrated facility for the production of
fabricated uranium fuel cores by chemical and metallurgical techniques." The
plant was known as the Feed Materials Production Center since the uranium fuel
cores it produced were the 'feed' for the AEC's plutonium production reactors.
[4]

These nuclear reactors were located at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, the Savannah
River Site in South Carolina and at Hanford in the state of Washington. The
uranium metal produced was in the form of derbies, ingots, billets and fuel
cores.[4] The FMPC also served as the country's central repository for another
radioactive metal, thorium.[5][6]

The plant was located in the rural town of Fernald, which is about 20 miles
(32 km) northwest of Cincinnati, Ohio, and occupies 1,050 acres (425
hectares). This location was chosen because it was between the uranium ore
delivery ports of New York and New Orleans, and it was accessible to the other
main AEC sites. In addition, the site was close to Cincinnati's large labor
force, the landscape was level making the site's construction easy, it was
isolated, which provided safety and security, and it was located 30 to 50 feet
above a large water aquifer, which supplied the water needed for uranium metal
processing. From 1951 to 1989 Fernald converted uranium ore into metal, and
then fabricated this metal into target elements for nuclear reactors. Annual
production rates ranged from a high in 1960 of 10,000 metric tons to a low in
1975 of 1,230 metric tons. Refining uranium metal was a process requiring a
series of chemical and metallurgical conversions that occurred in nine
specialized plants at the site.[7]

Releases from the Fernald site to the surrounding area resulted in exposure to
community residents included ionizing radiation, soluble and insoluble forms
of uranium, and various other hazardous chemicals. The Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC) has conducted a historical exposure
characterization and developed dose estimation models through the Fernald Dose
Reconstruction Project, with an endpoint of developing an algorithm to
estimate doses to individual persons who lived within the exposure assessment
domain (the area within a ten kilometer radius from the center of the plant
site). In addition to radioactive materials, many other non-radiological toxic
substances were present in the production area as materials, by-products or
products. Workers were exposed to chlorinated and non-chlorinated solvents,
metals and metal salts, and nuisance dusts. Community residents may have been
exposed to these substances through ground water pathways, soil contamination,
and air dispersion of emissions from the site.[8]

Two separate medical surveillance programs, for former workers and community
residents, have been funded by settlements of class action litigation against
National Lead of Ohio, a contractor for the Department of Energy. These
Fernald Settlement Funds are administered by a US Federal Court, which
maintains oversight of the Fernald Medical Monitoring Programs. The Fernald
(Residents) Medical Monitoring Program (FMMP) is a voluntary ongoing medical
surveillance program for community residents living within five miles of the
perimeter of the Fernald site, and the Fernald Workers Medical Monitoring
Program (FWMMP) is a program for former workers who were employed when
National Lead of Ohio was the contractor. Activities of the medical monitoring
programs include both periodic medical examinations and diagnostic testing and
yearly questionnaire data collection. In January 2007, there were 9,764
persons enrolled in the FMMP and 2716 former workers enrolled in the FWMMP.
The FMMP has an extensive computer database available for research studies.
Samples of whole blood, serum, plasma and urine were obtained from all FMMP
participants at the time of the initial examination, and over 100,000 one-ml
aliquots of these biospecimens have been stored at −80 °C since then.[9]

In June 1984, 39-year-old pipe fitter, David "Dave" Bocks disappeared on shift
and was reported missing. A witness reported seeing Bocks and a supervisor
inside of a vehicle at about 4:00 AM with the windows rolled up on a hot night
having a serious discussion. At 5:00 AM, the witness reported seeing Bocks and
speaking with him, who stated he was putting up his tools and headed toward
Plant 4.[10] His remains were later discovered inside a uranium processing
furnace located in Plant 6; a sudden 28-degree drop in furnace temperature
(which was kept at a constant 1300 degrees F) had been recorded at 5:15 AM
during the night of Bocks' disappearance.[11] The investigations found
insufficient evidence that foul play was involved. However, some, including
Bocks' family, believed that he was murdered by one or more coworkers who
suspected him of being a whistleblower in the 1984 nuclear emissions
scandal.[12][13]

The production process at the Fernald Feed Materials Production Center begins
at **Plant 1** , also known as the **Sampling Plant**. The principal function
of the Sampling Plant was to obtain representative samples of the large
quantities of incoming ore concentrates. This plant was divided into two main
processing lines, one for Q-11 and one for INX. Q-11 was the term used to
refer to radium bearing ores primarily mined in the Belgian Congo while INX
was a non-radium concentrate. The problem with handling radium bearing ores
was that one of radium's daughter particles is radon: an invisible radioactive
gas.

Q-11 was received in 55-gallon drums. The drums were deheaded before
processing and were conveyed through a thawing tunnel, which also provided
surge capacity of deheaded drums. The drums were lifted to the top of the
building by a skip hoist where they were emptied into a surge hopper that
feeds the magnetic separator and jaw crusher. From the jaw crusher, the one-
half inch material passes through a rotary drum dryer to a system of
conveyors, which conveys the material to a surge hopper that feeds the ring
roll mill. The particle size output from the mill was controlled to about 100
mesh by an air classifier mounted directly on the mill. The undersized
material was blown to a cyclone separator that was mounted directly above the
first Gallagher sampler. The three Gallagher samplers in series each took a
10% cut of the stream fed to it, producing a sample approximately 0.1% of the
original lot size. The main stream was conveyed to a drumming station where it
was packaged in 55-gallon or 30-gallon drums for use in the Refinery. The
official weight was taken at this point.

The INX line was similar to the Q-11 line except that the thawing tunnel has
been omitted and a hammer mill and bucket elevator replaces the jaw crusher,
rotary dryer, ring roll mill, air classifier, and cyclone separator.

In addition to sampling incoming ores this plant reconditions 30 and 55 gallon
drums used to transport and store radioactive materials onsite. It also
contains a safe-geometry digestion system used to process enriched uranium
materials assaying up to 5% 235U. This digester was so named because the
piping was of such a diameter and distance between pipes making a criticality
incident nigh impossible.[ _citation needed_ ]

**Plant 2/3** was known as the **Ore Refinery & Denitration Plant**. It was
called Plant 2/3 because two separate functions occur in the same building.
Here uranium values were recovered from feed materials (i.e., ores,
concentrates and residues) and were converted to concentrated uranium
trioxide, also called orange salt. In addition to uranium, the Refinery was
capable of extracting and purifying a number of different materials. The Ore
Refinery consists of three major process areas designated digestion (Plant 2),
extraction and denitration (Plant 3). Support areas include nitric acid
recovery, raffinate treatment and refinery sump. The digestion, extraction,
and raffinate areas included 'hot' and 'cold' sides. To provide radiation
protection from the radium-bearing Q-11 ore [the "hot" material], concrete
shielding was provided around appropriate process equipment and the 'hot' side
of each area was enclosed by concrete walls.

The principal function of Plant 2/3 was uranium purification and conversion of
uranium bearing materials into uranium trioxide (UO3), or orange oxide. There
are three principal forms of uranium residues, each having a separate
processing route for putting the uranium into solution. Uranium oxides are
dissolved in 6000 gallon vats of pure nitric acid in the Oxide Digester (also
known as the west metal dissolver), miscellaneous residues that required
filtration were dissolved in the Slag Leach Digester, and metals were
dissolved in the Metal Dissolver. If the ore was poured too rapidly into the
nitric acid vats a condition known as a "boilover" results. The reaction
generates so much gas that it becomes a foam and boils over the sides of the
vat. Many workers were told to not step in any puddles on the floor as they
were probably nitric acid left from one of these "boilover" incidents.[ _who?_
] The site employed their own cobblers just to repair work boots that had been
exposed to too much acid. Another hazard was the nitrogen dioxide fumes coming
off the nitric acid vats. There were so many fumes that on high humidity days
during the summer there appeared to be an orange cloud encasing this building
and anyone just walking past would experience a sensation as if he had
wandered into a swarm of bees.[ _dubious – discuss_]

The resulting "UNH" (uranium nitrate hexahydrate) material pumped out of the
vats was then processed through extraction to purify the solution. The UNH
solution was passed through a multistage liquid-liquid counter current tower
with tributyl phosphate and kerosene to extract the uranyl nitrate. The
impurities exit the tower as the raffinate stream for further processing. The
extract solution was passed through another counter current extraction tower
to re-extract the uranyl nitrate from the kerosene into deionized water. The
kerosene was then processed through a wash to be recycled back through the
extraction process. The resulting UNH solution was now ready for further
concentrating and thermal denitration.

The UNH solution was concentrated through a process known as "boildown". In
this process, heat was applied to the solution from steam coils inside the
boildown tanks. The water was removed through evaporation, thus concentrating
the solution. The solution was concentrated from 90 grams uranium per liter to
1300 grams uranium per liter in two stages.

The concentrated solution now in 250 gallon batches was further heated, in a
process known as Pot Denitration, to thermally denitrate the UNH to uranium
trioxide. The uranium trioxide material was then pneumatically removed from
the denitration pots and packaged out in hoppers with a capacity of 3.6 metric
tons or 55 gallon drums. This pneumatic transfer of the product was known as
Gulping.[ _citation needed_ ]

The **Green Salt Plant** , the common name for **Plant 4** , produced "green
salt" (uranium tetrafluoride) from UO3. Green salt was the key intermediate
compound in the overall process of producing uranium metal. This plant
contains 12 banks of furnaces for the conversion of uranium trioxide to
uranium tetrafluoride. Each bank consists of four furnaces in series. The
first furnace was constructed of stainless steel for the hydrogen reduction of
orange oxide to uranium dioxide, by the reaction: UO3 \+ H2 → UO2 \+ H2O. The
UO2 was then fed directly to the first of the next three furnaces in series.
These furnaces were constructed of Inconel for the hydrofluorination of
uranium dioxide to green salt. The reaction was: UO2 \+ 4HF → UF4 \+ 2H2O.

Orange oxide was received from the Refinery in five-ton mobile hoppers, which
were mounted on seal hoppers to feed the reduction furnace at a rate of
approximately 375 pounds per hour for producing metal grade UF4. The powder
was agitated and carried through the reduction furnace by a ribbon flight
screw. Dissociated ammonia was metered to the reduction reactors and passed
counter-currently to the bed of uranium oxide within the chemical reactor. The
off-gases from the reduction reactors were passed to a hydrogen burner where
the excess hydrogen was burned and then passed through a dust collector to
remove any entrained uranium dioxide that might have been present. The UO2 in
the reduction furnace passed through a seal hopper and a feed screw to the
first of the three hydrofluorination furnaces. The bed of UO2 was moved
through the hydrofluorination furnace by ribbon flight screws and contacted
counter-currently by hydrofluoric acid vapors. The UF4 was removed from the
third furnace and conveyed to a packaging station where the product was
packaged in 10-gallon pails for use in the Metal Plant, or in 5-ton containers
for shipment to the cascades. The off-gases containing water vapor formed in
the reaction and excess hydrofluoric acid was removed from the first furnace
and were sent to hydrofluoric acid recovery. The gases first passed to a
partial condenser that removed all of the water in the form of 70% aqueous
hydrofluoric acid. The remainder of the gases was then passed to a total
condenser, which condenses the remainder of the acid as anhydrous hydrofluoric
acid. The gases at this point contain only the nitrogen from seals and purge
gases and small amounts of hydrofluoric acid that did not condense in the
total condenser. These were passed through potassium hydroxide scrubbers to
remove the last traces of acid and then discharged to the atmosphere.[
_citation needed_ ]

**Plant 5** , the **Metals Production Plant** main process equipment consisted
of eleven jolters, five filling machines, forty-four reduction furnaces, two
breakout stations in the Reduction Area and twenty-eight vacuum casting
furnaces in the Recast Area.

The conversion of UF to metal was accomplished by the thermite reduction of
green salt with magnesium in a refractory lined steel reaction vessel. 450
pounds of green salt were blended with approximately 72 pounds of magnesium.
The resulting mixture was uniformly packed into the reduction "bomb", which
has previously been lined with refractory slag in a jolting apparatus.
Following these steps, the bomb was capped with refractory, sealed, and placed
in one of 49 electric muffle furnaces. The furnace temperature was raised to
approximately 1,225 °F and after about four hours the thermite type reduction
reaction occurs: UF4 \+ 2Mg → 2MgF2 \+ U (metal). The charge was then allowed
to separate and cool in the furnace for 10 minutes, after which it was removed
and cooled to room temperature. Finally, the solidified uranium metal (derby)
was separated from the slag and liner materials in a sequence of manual and
mechanical operations that take place at the breakout station. The yields
expected from this operation were about 95%. There are many documented
explosions of these furnaces due to improperly packed refractory lining or a
magnesium flare. Whatever the cause, the building would fill with radioactive
smoke along with a real probability that molten uranium metal would come
pouring out of the bottom of the furnace.[ _dubious – discuss_]

The MgF2 slag from the breakout station was conveyed to the slag recycling
plant, where it was stored awaiting processing for reuse as refractory liner.
The slag recovery process consists of crushing, pulverizing, and classifying
the slag, which was then transferred back to the reduction area for use.

The next step in the plant consists of melting massive uranium metal and
casting an ingot. Graphite crucibles were loaded with a charge of derbies and
solid recycle scrap. The loaded crucibles were then mechanically positioned in
induction melting and casting furnaces that were designed to give a maximum of
flexibility and a minimum of human exposure to radioactivity. The uranium
metal was melted under high vacuum to minimize contamination of the melt with
atmospheric gases and to permit purification of the metal by distillation of
volatile contaminants. At approximately 2,550 °F, the molten metal was poured
into a graphite mold and the ingot was allowed to cool and solidify.
Additional equipment was provided for the ingot to be removed from the mold,
weighed, cropped, sampled, and stored for further processing in the Metals
Fabrication Plant [Plant 6]. The ingot was approximately 7" in diameter, by
45" long, and weighs about 1,200 pounds.[ _citation needed_ ]

**Plant 6** was known as the **Metals Fabrication Plant**. "Ingots from Plant
5 and MCW Mallinckrodt Chemical Works were bloomed into billets and then
rolled into rods that were straightened and machined to finished reactor slug
dimensions. The finished product consists of either hollow or solid uranium
slugs, designed for both internal and external cooling during pile
irradiation. The product shipped from Plant 6 must pass rigid inspection for
dimensional tolerances, metal quality, and surface conditions."

Uranium ingots were charged into an automated ingot preheat furnace where they
were lowered into a Li2CO3-K2CO3 molten salt to be heated to 1,150–1,200 °F
before being discharged singly to the mill table. The ingot was passed back
and forth through the blooming mill until it was reduced to an oval billet
approximately 2" to 2½". The ends of the billet were then cut off by a
cropping shear before it was pushed into an equalizing furnace. The billet was
reheated to 1,150–1,200 °F in the equalizing furnace and was then discharged
into the finishing mill. The finishing mill consists of six stands that reduce
the rod to the final diameter of 1.43" for Hanford rods, and 1.12" for
Savannah River rods.

The rods were cut into 22-foot lengths as they leave the last stand by means
of a flying shear. The Savannah rods were air cooled to room temperature on
the cooling bed and then were cold straightened in a Medart Straightener. Rods
to be beta heat treated by-pass the cooling bed and were lifted into the beta
heat treating furnace by means of a hoist, to be held at 1,320–1,365 °F for
11–20 minutes and then quenched in cold water. After quenching, these rods
were conveyed to the Medart straightener for straightening. The rods were
located in ​2 5⁄8-inch Acme-Gridley automatic screw machines where slugs were
cut from the rods. The Hanford slugs were then placed in the Heald machine,
which cuts the slugs to desired lengths and finishes and radiuses the ends.
The Savannah River slugs were reduced to exact dimensions of size, surface,
and straightness on a centerless grinder after which a contour was placed on
the surface by a thread rolling machine. The slugs were numbered and put on a
basket on a conveyor that passes through a degreasing tank, pickling tank, two
rinse tanks and a hot air dryer before depositing the slug basket in the
Inspection Department. The slugs were inspected for seams, striations,
dimensions and handling defects with the good slugs being packed for shipment.

In addition to the solid slugs produced in Plant 6, hollow fuel element
production was started about January 1, 1956. Hollow slug blanks were produced
oversize on a 2⅝" RB-6 Acme-Gridley machine and were centerless ground before
the drilling operation. The oversize slug blank was then loaded into a
magazine loader on a 1⅝" Acme and thence through a four-step drilling
operation making a hole halfway through the blank. The blank was then reversed
and again placed in the magazine loader. After a four-step drilling sequence
produces a hole all the way through the blank, a reamer was passed through
this hole in the final position. The oversize Outer Diameter was turned
concentric with the finished Inner Diameter on an automatic Sundstrand lathe.
Subsequent operations were the same as those for the solid slug.[ _citation
needed_ ]

**Plant 7** was known as the **6 to 4 Plant** because UF6 was converted to UF4
here. It was basically a high-temperature gas-to-solid reactor system that
only operated for two years: 1954–1956. To produce UF4, the uranium
hexafluoride was first heated to form a gaseous compound and was then reduced
to UF4. The reduction occurs in a reaction with hydrogen. UF6 vapor and
hydrogen will be mixed at the top of each reactor by means of a cyclonic type
mixer. The bulk of the reduction reaction will occur at the top of the
reactor. The UF4 formed will be a powdery solid that falls like snow to the
bottom of the reactor.[ _citation needed_ ]

The **Scrap Recovery Plant** , the name given to **Plant 8** , process
primarily involves upgrading uranium recycle materials from FMPC and off-site
operations to prepare feed materials for head-end processing in the Refinery.
Operations include drum washing, filtering Refinery tailings, operation of
rotary kiln, box, muffle, and oxidation furnaces, and screening of furnace
products.

Bomb liner material received from Plant 5 in mobile hoppers was emptied at an
unloading station and elevated to a surge hopper. Material as needed was sent
from the surge hopper through a jaw crusher and into a shelf type oxidation
furnace. Here the metallic uranium was oxidized to triuranium octoxide (U3O8).
The material discharged from the furnace was lifted to a surge hopper and then
as needed was sent through a roll mill and ground to -325 mesh size. It was
then fed into carbon brick digestion tanks where the uranium was dissolved in
hydrochloric acid containing a little sodium chlorate. The undissolved solids
were filtered off and dumped into a truck, which hauls the spent material to a
scrap dump. Uranium in the filtrate was sent to a precipitation tank and
precipitated with ammonium hydroxide (NH4OH), in presence of phosphoric acid
to form UAP (uranyl ammonium phosphate). The resulting slurry was filtered and
the uranium bearing cake was introduced to a drying furnace. The dried UAP was
sent to the refinery. In addition to the wet system described, several
furnaces were installed in the plant for massive metal oxidation,
pyrohydrolysis, drying, chip and sludge combustion, etc. Most of the furnaces
can be used for more than one of the above operations.

During the summer of 1962, a new facility was started in Plant 8 for the
production of UF4 by an aqueous precipitation technique known as the Winlo
process. The Winlo process was developed for the low-cost chemical conversion
of relatively pure uranium concentrates to green salt by a hydrometallurgical
process. The feed to the plant Winlo system was made up of a combination of
black oxide (U3O8) generated by burning metallic residues, uranyl chloride
solutions generated by dissolving massive metal residues in hydrochloric acid,
and UAP produced from low-grade residues in the hydrometallurgical recovery
system.[ _citation needed_ ]

A brief description of the Winlo process follows:

The primary purpose of **Plant 9** , the **Special Products Plant** was to
process slightly enriched uranium and to cast larger ingots than those
produced in Plant 5. The plant contains facilities for producing derbies,
ingots, slugs, and washers of various enrichments. Construction of the plant
as a thorium metal production process was completed in 1954 and the thorium
process was begun in October 1954. Plant 9 was originally designed and
constructed as a thorium metal production plant, yet had to be regarded as a
semi-development works because of a lack of process information. The two basic
processes, hydrofluoric acid precipitation of thorium fluoride and induction
de-zincing and melting, which were used to start the plant, were not able to
produce a pure metal. However, improvement in production techniques permitted
the eventual development of an oxalate precipitation process capable of
producing pure thorium metal. Interest in this item declined during the
1956–1957 period and the plant operations evolved to the casting of enriched
uranium ingots larger than those being processed in the Metals Production and
Metals Fabrication Plants. Ingots were cast up to 13-inch diameter, 38-inch
length and having a weight approaching 2,000 pounds. As such the processes and
equipment used were almost identical to those of Plants 5 and 6.[ _citation
needed_ ]

The **Pilot Plant** consists of small size equipment for piloting refinery
operations, hexafluoride reduction, derby pickling, ingot casting, and other
equipment for special purposes. This plant was used for numerous process
testing and experimental operations as well as being employed as a production
facility for various processes. In the early years, derbies were produced
there, in the manner described in Plant 5. Another process operated on a
production scale was the direct conversion of uranium hexafluoride to green
salt. This production process was operated with UF6 that contained as much as
2.5% U235. A two-step procedure was used. First was the vaporization of UF6:
solid UF6 in large 10 or 14 ton cylinders were heated in autoclaves at
approximately 110 °C to produce gaseous UF6. The next step was the reduction
of the UF6 gas, which involved mixing it with hydrogen gas at 480–650 °C in
metal reactors to produce UF4 powder. Hydrogen fluoride was a valuable
byproduct of the reaction, which was: UF6 \+ H2 → UF4 \+ 2HF. In addition,
most of the thorium production activity at the FMPC took place inside the
Pilot Plant. Thorium production activities began in 1964 and continued until
1980.[ _citation needed_ ]

The Pilot Plant met the needs of development projects and special orders. Some
of the equipment that was available for and had been used in enriched
processing was as follows:

The Fernald Closure Project is a program run by the United States Department
of Energy to clean up the former uranium processing site Fernald Feed
Materials Production Center.

In 1990, Congress approved closure of the site approved environmental cleanup
of the facility. Fluor Fernald, part of the Fluor Corporation, was awarded the
contract in 1992 for cleanup of the site. Fluor Fernald completed their
portion of the cleanup in October 2006, 12 years ahead of schedule and 7.8
billion dollars below the original cost estimate.[14][15] The waste was
permanently buried at Waste Control Specialists.

The site is permanently unfit for human habitation, according to federal
scientists, and "will have to be closely monitored essentially forever."[16]

Cleanup costs were estimated at $1 billion over 10 years.[17]

The $4.4 billion cleanup of the surface areas was completed in December 2006,
and the site was turned into the Fernald Preserve nature preserve. Thousands
of tons of contaminated concrete, sludge, liquid waste, and soil were removed
from the site and replaced with man-made wetlands and greenery.

Ongoing cleanup operations include routine monitoring of the environmental
conditions with test wells, including the uranium groundwater plume extending
south of the plant area, storage of residual waste onsite, and filtering of
uranium contamination from the Great Miami River aquifer. These cleanup
operations, along with restrictions on establishing new wells in areas
exceeding water contaminant limits, will continue for the foreseeable
future.[18]

The following are links that provide additional information about the Fernald
site and the health risks associated with its processes:

Coordinates: 39°17′53″N 84°41′27″W﻿ / ﻿39.29806°N 84.69083°W﻿ / 39.29806;
-84.69083

