File originale ‎(file in formato SVG, dimensioni nominali 900 × 600 pixel,
dimensione del file: 620 byte)

  

**Hiligaynon:** Hayahay sang Republika sang Tsina (Taiwan)

Article 9

The following items shall not be the subject matter of copyright:

The term "official documents" in the first subparagraph of the preceding
paragraph includes proclamations, text of speeches, news releases, and other
documents prepared by civil servants in the course of carrying out their
duties.

**WORKS OF STATE RUN ENTERPRISES ARE NOT AUTOMATICALLY FREE OF COPYRIGHT**

This work is from any of the items above and is in the public domain in Taiwan
administered by the Republic of China and possibly other jurisdictions. _For
images of traffic signs and indicating lines, please see alsoTemplate:PD-ROC-
Traffic Signs and Template:PD-ROC-Traffic Indicating Lines._

PD-ROC-exempt Public domain in the Republic of China
//commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flag_of_the_Republic_of_China.svg

This work is from any of the items above and is in the public domain in
Mainland China and possibly other jurisdictions. For works whose copyright has
expired, see also Template:PD-China. (Article 5 of the Implementing
Regulations of the Copyright Law of the People's Republic of China defines
news on current affairs as the **mere facts or happenings** reported by the
mass media, such as newspapers, periodicals and radio and television
stations.)

PD-PRC-exempt Public domain in the People's Republic of China
//commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Flag_of_the_Republic_of_China.svg

Opere derivate da questo file: Flag of the Republic of China (Pantone).svg:
![Flag of the Republic of China
\(Pantone\).svg](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/1/11/Flag_of_the_Republic_of_China_%28Pantone%29.svg/100px-
Flag_of_the_Republic_of_China_%28Pantone%29.svg.png)

  

The colors approximation in other color spaces are listed below:

  
  

Fare clic su un gruppo data/ora per vedere il file come si presentava nel
momento indicato.

Più di 100 pagine usano questo file. Di seguito sono elencate solo le prime
100 pagine che usano questo file. È disponibile un elenco completo.

Anche i seguenti wiki usano questo file:

Visualizza l'utilizzo globale di questo file.

Questo file contiene informazioni aggiuntive, probabilmente aggiunte dalla
fotocamera o dallo scanner usati per crearlo o digitalizzarlo. Se il file è
stato modificato, alcuni dettagli potrebbero non corrispondere alla realtà.

