_**The Lord of the Rings**_ is a film series of three epic fantasy adventure
films directed by Peter Jackson, based on the novel written by J. R. R.
Tolkien. The films are subtitled _The Fellowship of the Ring_ (2001), _The Two
Towers_ (2002) and _The Return of the King_ (2003). Produced and distributed
by New Line Cinema with the co-production of WingNut Films, it is an
international venture between New Zealand and the United States. The films
feature an ensemble cast including Elijah Wood, Ian McKellen, Liv Tyler, Viggo
Mortensen, Sean Astin, Cate Blanchett, John Rhys-Davies, Christopher Lee,
Billy Boyd, Dominic Monaghan, Orlando Bloom, Hugo Weaving, Andy Serkis and
Sean Bean.

Set in the fictional world of Middle-earth, the films follow the hobbit Frodo
Baggins as he and the Fellowship embark on a quest to destroy the One Ring, to
ensure the destruction of its maker, the Dark Lord Sauron. The Fellowship
eventually splits up and Frodo continues the quest with his loyal companion
Sam and the treacherous Gollum. Meanwhile, Aragorn, heir in exile to the
throne of Gondor, along with Legolas, Gimli, Merry, Pippin and the wizard
Gandalf, unite to rally the Free Peoples of Middle-earth in the War of the
Ring in order to aid Frodo by weakening Sauron's forces.

The three films were shot simultaneously and entirely in Jackson's native New
Zealand from 11 October 1999 until 22 December 2000, with pick-up shots done
from 2001 to 2004. It was one of the biggest and most ambitious film projects
ever undertaken, with a budget of $281 million. An extended edition of each
film was released on home video a year after its theatrical release.

_The Lord of the Rings_ is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most
influential film trilogies ever made. It was a major financial success and is
among the highest-grossing film series of all time with over $2.9 billion in
worldwide receipts. Each film was critically acclaimed and heavily awarded,
winning 17 out of their 30 Academy Award nominations.

In the Second Age of Middle-earth, the lords of Elves, Dwarves, and Men are
given Rings of Power. Unbeknownst to them, the Dark Lord Sauron forges the One
Ring in Mount Doom, infusing into it a great part of his power to dominate,
through it and at a distance, the other Rings, so he might conquer Middle-
earth. A final alliance of men and elves battles Sauron's forces in Mordor,
where Prince Isildur of Gondor severs Sauron's finger, and the Ring with it,
thereby destroying his physical form. With Sauron's first defeat, the Third
Age of Middle-earth begins. Unfortunately, the Ring's influence corrupts
Isildur, and, rather than destroy the Ring, Isildur takes it for himself.
Isildur is later killed by Orcs, and the Ring is lost for 2,500 years, until
it is found by Gollum, who owns it for five centuries. The Ring is then found
by a hobbit named Bilbo Baggins, who turns invisible when he puts it on, but
is unaware of its history.

Sixty years later, Bilbo celebrates his 111th birthday in the Shire, reuniting
with his old friend, Gandalf the Grey. Bilbo reveals that he intends to leave
the Shire for one last adventure, and he leaves his inheritance, including the
Ring, to his nephew, Frodo. Although Bilbo has begun to become corrupted by
the Ring and tries to keep it for himself, Gandalf intervenes. Gandalf,
suspicious of the Ring, tells Frodo to keep it secret and to keep it safe.
Gandalf then investigates the Ring, discovers its true nature, and returns to
warn Frodo. Gandalf also learns that Gollum was tortured by Orcs, and that
Gollum uttered two words during his torture: "Shire" and "Baggins." Gandalf
instructs Frodo to leave the Shire, accompanied by his friend Samwise Gamgee.
Gandalf rides to Isengard to meet with fellow wizard Saruman the White, but
learns that he has joined forces with Sauron, who has dispatched his nine
undead Nazgûl servants to find Frodo. After a brief battle, Saruman imprisons
Gandalf. Frodo and Sam are joined by fellow hobbits Merry and Pippin, and they
evade the Nazgûl, arriving in Bree, where they are meant to meet Gandalf.
However, Gandalf never arrives, and they are instead aided by a ranger named
Strider, a friend of Gandalf's, who promises to escort them to Rivendell. The
hobbits are ambushed by the Nazgûl on Weathertop, and their leader, the Witch-
King, stabs Frodo with a cursed Morgul blade. Arwen, an elf and Strider's
betrothed, comes to Frodo's aid, rescuing him and incapacitating the Nazgûl.
She takes him to Rivendell, where he is healed. Frodo meets Gandalf, who
escaped Isengard with help from Gwaihir, a giant eagle. Arwen's father, Lord
Elrond, holds a council that decides the Ring must be destroyed in Mount Doom.
While the members argue, Frodo volunteers to take the Ring, accompanied by
Gandalf, Sam, Merry, Pippin, elf Legolas, dwarf Gimli, Boromir of Gondor, and
Strider, who is revealed to be Aragorn, Isildur's heir and the rightful King
of Gondor. Bilbo gives Frodo his sword, Sting. The Fellowship of the Ring sets
off, but Saruman's magic forces them to travel through the Mines of Moria,
much to Gandalf's displeasure.

The Fellowship discovers that the dwarves within Moria have been slain, and
they are attacked by Orcs and a cave troll. They defeat them, but are
confronted by Durin's Bane, a Balrog residing within the mines. Gandalf casts
the Balrog into a vast chasm, but it drags Gandalf down into the darkness with
it. The rest of the Fellowship, now led by Aragorn, reaches Lothlórien, home
to elves Galadriel and Celeborn. Galadriel privately informs Frodo that only
he can complete the quest, and that one of his friends will try to take the
Ring. Meanwhile, Saruman creates an army of Uruk-hai to track down and kill
the Fellowship.

The Fellowship leaves Lothlórien by river to Parth Galen. Frodo wanders off
and is confronted by Boromir, who tries to take the Ring in desperation.
Afraid of the Ring corrupting his friends, Frodo decides to travel to Mordor
alone. The Fellowship is then ambushed by the Uruk-hai. Merry and Pippin are
taken captive, and Boromir is mortally wounded by the Uruk chieftain, Lurtz.
Aragorn arrives and slays Lurtz, and watches Boromir die peacefully. Sam
follows Frodo, accompanying him to keep his promise to Gandalf to protect
Frodo, while Aragorn, Legolas, and Gimli go to rescue Merry and Pippin.

Awakening from a dream of Gandalf the Grey battling the Balrog, Frodo Baggins
and his friend Samwise Gamgee find themselves lost in the Emyn Muil near
Mordor and soon become aware that they are being stalked by Gollum, the former
owner of the One Ring. After capturing him, a sympathetic Frodo decides to use
Gollum as a guide to Mordor, despite Sam's objections.

Meanwhile, Aragorn, Legolas and Gimli pursue the Uruk-hai to save their
companions Merry and Pippin. The Uruk-hai are ambushed by a group of Rohirrim,
while the two Hobbits escape into Fangorn Forest and encounter Treebeard, an
Ent. Aragorn's group later meets the Rohirrim and their leader Éomer, who
reveals that they have been exiled by their king Théoden who is being
manipulated by Saruman and his servant Gríma Wormtongue into turning a blind
eye to Saruman's forces running rampant in Rohan. While searching for the
Hobbits in Fangorn, Aragorn's group encounters Gandalf, who, after succumbing
to his injuries while killing the Balrog in Moria, has been resurrected as
Gandalf the White to help save Middle-earth.

Aragorn's group travels to Rohan's capital city Edoras, where Gandalf releases
Théoden from Saruman's influence and Wormtongue is banished. After learning of
Saruman's plans to wipe out Rohan with his Uruk-hai army, Théoden decides to
evacuate his citizens to Helm's Deep, an ancient fortress that has provided
refuge to Rohan's people in times past, while Gandalf departs to acquire the
aid of the Éomer's army. Aragorn establishes a friendship with Théoden's
niece, Éowyn, who quickly becomes infatuated with him. When the refugees comes
under attack by Warg-riding Orcs, Aragorn falls off a cliff and is presumed
dead. However, he is revived by his horse Brego and rides to Helm's Deep. The
defenders are joined by a detachment of Elves from Lothlórien, the Uruk-hai
army arrives at Helm's Deep that night and a night-long battle ensues. The
Uruk-hai breach the outer wall using gunpowder-like explosives and force the
remaining defenders to retreat into the inner castle.

Merry and Pippin, having convinced Treebeard that they were allies, are
brought to an Ent Council in Fangorn where the Ents decide not to assist in
the war. Pippin then tells Treebeard to take them in the direction of
Isengard, where they witness the devastation caused to the forest by Saruman's
war efforts. An enraged Treebeard summons the Ents and they storm Isengard,
drowning the orcs by breaking their river dam and stranding Saruman in
Orthanc.

At Helm's Deep, Aragorn convinces a despairing Theoden to ride out and meet
the Uruks in one last charge. Gandalf and Éomer's horsemen arrive at sunrise,
turning the tide of the battle. The Uruk-hai flee into Fangorn forest, which
has moved closer to the battle at the urging of Treebeard, where they are
destroyed. Gandalf warns that Sauron's retaliation will be terrible and swift.

Meanwhile, Gollum leads Frodo and Sam through the Dead Marshes to the Black
Gate but convinces them to Mordor by an alternative route. Frodo and Sam are
captured by the Rangers of Ithilien led by Faramir, brother of the late
Boromir. Frodo helps Faramir catch Gollum to save him from being killed and
Faramir learns of the One Ring and takes his captives with him to Gondor to
win his father's respect. While passing through the besieged Gondorian city of
Osgiliath, Sam reveals that Boromir was driven mad by the Ring and tried to
take it. An attacking Nazgûl nearly captures Frodo, who momentarily attacks
Sam before coming to his senses, forcing Sam to remind him that they are
fighting for the good still left in Middle-earth. Faramir is impressed by
Frodo and releases them along with Gollum. While leading the hobbits once
more, Gollum decides to take revenge on Frodo and reclaim the ring by leading
the group to "Her" upon arriving at Cirith Ungol.

Two Hobbits, Sméagol and Déagol, are fishing when Déagol discovers the One
Ring in the river. Sméagol is ensnared by the Ring, and kills his friend for
it. He retreats into the Misty Mountains as the Ring twists his body and mind,
until he becomes the creature Gollum.

Centuries later, during the War of the Ring, Gandalf leads Aragorn, Legolas,
Gimli, and King Théoden to Isengard, where they reunite with Merry and Pippin.
Gandalf retrieves the defeated Saruman's _palantír_. Pippin later looks into
the seeing-stone, and is telepathically attacked by Sauron. Gandalf deduces
that Sauron will attack Gondor's capital Minas Tirith. He rides there to warn
Gondor's steward Denethor, taking Pippin with him.

Gollum leads Frodo Baggins and Samwise Gamgee to Minas Morgul, where they
watch the Witch-king, leader of the nine Nazgûl, lead an army of Orcs towards
Gondor. The hobbits begin climbing a stair carved in the cliff face that will
take them into Mordor via a 'secret way' - unaware that Gollum plans to kill
them and take the Ring. The Witch-king and his forces strike and overwhelm
Osgiliath, forcing Faramir and his garrison to retreat to Minas Tirith.

Gollum disposes of the Hobbits' food, blaming Sam. Frodo tells Sam to go home,
before Frodo and Gollum continue to the tunnel leading to Mordor, where Gollum
tricks him into venturing into the lair of the giant spider Shelob. Frodo
narrowly escapes and confronts Gollum, telling him that he must destroy the
Ring for both their sakes. Gollum attacks Frodo, but falls down a chasm. Frodo
continues on, but Shelob discovers, paralyses, and binds him. However, Sam
arrives and injures Shelob, driving her away. Sam hides as Orcs appear and
take Frodo with them. The Orcs start a fight over ownership of Frodo's
_mithril_ vest, allowing Sam to escape with Frodo and continue their journey.

Aragorn learns from Elrond that Arwen is dying, having refused to leave Middle
Earth after seeing a vision of her son with Aragorn. Elrond gives Aragorn
Andúril, forged from the shards of Isildur's sword Narsil, so he can reclaim
his birthright while gaining reinforcements from the Dead Men of Dunharrow.
Joined by Legolas and Gimli, Aragorn travels to the Paths of the Dead,
recruiting the Army of the Dead by pledging to release them from the curse
Isildur put on them. Faramir is gravely wounded after a futile effort to
retake Osgiliath; believing his son to be dead, Denethor falls into madness.
Gandalf is left to defend the city against the Orc army, led by Gothmog. As
Gothmog's army forces its way into the city, Denethor attempts to kill himself
and Faramir on a pyre. Pippin alerts Gandalf and they save Faramir, but a
burning Denethor leaps to his death from the top of Minas Tirith just before
Théoden and his nephew, Éomer, arrive with the Rohirrim. During the ensuing
battle, they are overwhelmed by the Oliphaunt-riding Haradrim, while the
Witch-King mortally wounds Théoden. Though Théoden's niece Éowyn destroys the
Witch-king with Merry's help, Théoden succumbs to his wounds. Aragorn arrives
with the Army of the Dead, who overcome the Orcs and win the battle; Aragorn
then frees them from the curse. Aragorn decides to lead his army upon the
Black Gate as a distraction, so Frodo and Sam can get to Mount Doom.

Aragorn's army draw out Sauron's forces and empties Mordor, allowing Frodo and
Sam to reach the volcano, but Gollum attacks them just as they reach Mount
Doom. As he stands on the ledge over the volcanic fire, Frodo succumbs to the
Ring and claims it as his own. Gollum attacks Frodo and bites his finger off
to reclaim the Ring. Frodo fights back and as they struggle over the Ring,
both fall off the ledge. Gollum falls into the fire with the Ring and dies.
Frodo clings to the side of the ledge and Sam rescues him as the Ring
disintegrates in the lava. As Frodo and Sam escape, Sauron is destroyed along
with his forces and the Nine as Mordor crumbles. Gandalf flies in with eagles
to rescue the Hobbits, who awaken later in Minas Tirith and are reunited with
the surviving Fellowship members. Aragorn is crowned King of Gondor and takes
Arwen as his queen. The Hobbits return home to the Shire, where Sam marries
Rosie Cotton. A few years later, Frodo departs Middle-earth for the Undying
Lands with his uncle Bilbo, Gandalf, and the Elves. He leaves Sam the Red Book
of Westmarch, which details their adventures. Sam then returns to the Shire,
where he embraces Rosie and their children.

The following is a list of cast members who voiced or portrayed characters
appearing in the extended version of the films.[1][2][3]

Jackson began storyboarding and screenwriting the series with Christian
Rivers, Fran Walsh and Philippa Boyens in 1997 and assigned his crew to begin
designing Middle-earth at the same time.[4] He then hired long-time
collaborators Jim Rygiel and Richard Taylor to lead Weta Workshop on five
major design elements: armour, weapons, prosthetic makeup, creatures, and
miniatures. They were also visual effects supervisors. In November 1997, famed
Tolkien illustrators Alan Lee and John Howe joined the project;[5] most of the
imagery in the films is based on their various illustrations.[6] Production
designer Grant Major was charged with the task of converting Lee and Howe's
designs into architecture, creating models of the sets, while Dan Hennah
worked as art director, scouting locations and organizing the building of
sets.

Principal photography for all three films was conducted concurrently in many
locations within New Zealand's conservation areas and national parks. Filming
took place between 11 October 1999 and 22 December 2000 with Andrew Lesnie
serving as director of photography. Pick-up shoots were conducted annually
from 2001 to 2004.[7] The series was shot at over 150 different locations,
with seven different units shooting, as well as soundstages around Wellington
and Queenstown.[8] Along with Jackson directing the whole production, other
unit directors included John Mahaffie, Geoff Murphy, Fran Walsh, Barrie M.
Osborne, Rick Porras, and any other assistant director, producer, or writer
available. Jackson, Walsh, and Boyens did not write each film to correspond
exactly to its respective book, opting instead to write a three-part
adaptation with some sequences missing, some sequences created from scratch,
and some sequences moved from one area to another regardless of its placement
in the books. To allow the story to be clearer for viewers, Jackson takes a
more chronological approach to the story than did Tolkien. During shooting,
the screenplays continued to evolve, in part due to contributions from cast
members looking to further explore their characters.[5]

Each film had the benefit of a full year of post-production time before its
respective December release, often finishing in October–November, with the
crew immediately going to work on the next film. To avoid pressure, Jackson
hired a different editor for each film. John Gilbert worked on the first film,
Michael J. Horton on the second and Jamie Selkirk on the third. Daily rushes
would often last up to four hours, with scenes being done throughout 1999–2002
for the rough (4½ hours) assemblies of the films.[5] In total, 1828 km (six
million feet) of film was edited down to the 11 hours and 26 minutes (686
minutes) of extended running time.[8]

Howard Shore composed, orchestrated, conducted, and produced the trilogy's
music. He was hired in August 2000 and visited the set, and watched the
assembly cuts of _The Fellowship of the Ring_ and _The Return of the King_.[9]
In the music, Shore included many (85 to 110) leitmotifs to represent various
characters, cultures, and places – the largest catalogue of leitmotifs in the
history of cinema, surpassing – for comparison – that of the entire _Star
Wars_ film series. For example, there are multiple leitmotifs just for the
hobbits and the Shire. Although the first film had some of its score recorded
in Wellington, virtually all of the trilogy's score was recorded in Watford
Town Hall and mixed at Abbey Road Studios.[5] Jackson planned to advise the
score for six weeks each year in London, though for _The Two Towers_ he stayed
for twelve.[10]

The score is primarily played by the London Philharmonic Orchestra (ranging
from 93 to 120 players throughout the recording), London Voices, London
Oratory School Schola boy choir, and many artists such as Ben Del Maestro,
Enya, Renée Fleming, James Galway, Annie Lennox and Emilíana Torrini
contributed. Even actors Billy Boyd, Viggo Mortensen, Liv Tyler, Miranda Otto
(extended cuts only for the latter two), and Peter Jackson (for a single gong
sound in the second film) contributed to the score. Fran Walsh and Philippa
Boyens served as librettists, writing lyrics to various music and songs, which
David Salo translated into Tolkien's languages. The third film's end song,
"Into the West", was a tribute to a young filmmaker Jackson and Walsh
befriended named Cameron Duncan, who died of cancer in 2003.[11]

Shore composed a main theme for _The Fellowship_ rather than many different
character themes, and its strength and weaknesses in volume are depicted at
different points in the series. On top of that, individual themes were
composed to represent different cultures. Infamously, the amount of music
Shore had to write every day for the third film increased dramatically to
around seven minutes.[11] The music for the series turned out to be a success
and has been voted best movie soundtrack of all time for the six years
running, passing _Schindler's List_ (1993), _Gladiator_ (2000), _Star Wars_
(1977), and _Out of Africa_ (1985) respectively.[12]

The trilogy's online promotional trailer was first released on 27 April 2000,
and set a new record for download hits, registering 1.7 million hits in the
first 24 hours of its release.[13] The trailer used a selection from the
soundtrack for _Braveheart_ and _The Shawshank Redemption_ among other cuts.
In 2001, 24 minutes of footage from the series, primarily the Moria sequence,
was shown at the Cannes Film Festival, and was very well received.[14] The
showing also included an area designed to look like Middle-earth.[8]

_The Fellowship of the Ring_ was released 19 December 2001. It grossed $47
million in its U.S. opening weekend and made around $871 million worldwide. A
preview of _The Two Towers_ was inserted just before the end credits near the
end of the film's theatrical run.[15] A promotional trailer was later
released, containing music re-scored from the film _Requiem for a Dream_.[16]
_The Two Towers_ was released 18 December 2002. It grossed $62 million in its
first U.S. weekend and out-grossed its predecessor with $926 million
worldwide. The promotional trailer for _The Return of the King_ was debuted
exclusively before the New Line Cinema film _Secondhand Lions_ on 23 September
2003.[17] Released 17 December 2003, its first U.S. weekend gross was $72
million, and became the second film, after _Titanic_ (1997), to gross over $1
billion worldwide.

_The Lord of the Rings_ trilogy received universal acclaim and is constantly
ranked among the greatest film trilogies ever made.[32] Kenneth Turan of the
_Los Angeles Times_ wrote that "the trilogy will not soon, if ever, find its
equal",[33] while Todd McCarthy of _Variety_ described the films as "one of
the most ambitious and phenomenally successful dream projects of all
time".[34] _The Fellowship of the Ring_ was voted the greatest fantasy movie
of all time in a reader's poll conducted by American magazine _Wired_ in 2012,
while _The Two Towers_ and _The Return of the King_ placed fourth and third
respectively.[35]

The series appears in the Dallas–Fort Worth Film Critics Association: Top 10
Films, _Time_ 's All-Time 100 Movies, and James Berardinelli's Top 100.[36] In
2007, _USA Today_ named the series as the most important films of the past 25
years.[37] _Entertainment Weekly_ put it on its end-of-the-decade, "best-of"
list, saying, "Bringing a cherished book to the big screen? No sweat. Peter
Jackson's trilogy — or, as we like to call it, our preciousssss — exerted its
irresistible pull, on advanced Elvish speakers and neophytes alike."[38]
_Paste_ named it one of the 50 Best Movies of the Decade (2000–2009), ranking
it at No. 4.[39] In another _Time_ magazine list, the series ranks second in
"Best Movies of the Decade".[40] In addition, six characters and their
respective actors made the list of 'The 100 Greatest Movie Characters', also
compiled by _Empire_ , with Viggo Mortensen's portrayal of Aragorn ranking No.
15, Ian McKellen's portrayal of Gandalf ranking No. 30, Ian Holm's portrayal
of Bilbo Baggins (shared with Martin Freeman for his portrayal of the same
character in _The Hobbit_ films) ranking No. 61, Andy Serkis' portrayal of
Gollum ranking No. 66, Sean Astin's portrayal of Samwise Gamgee ranking No.
77, and Orlando Bloom's portrayal of Legolas ranking No. 94.[41]

The three films together were nominated for a total of 30 Academy Awards, of
which they won 17, both records for any movie trilogy.[49] _The Fellowship of
the Ring_ earned 13 nominations, the most of any film at the 74th Academy
Awards, winning four; _The Two Towers_ won two awards from six nominations at
the 75th Academy Awards; _The Return of the King_ won in every category in
which it was nominated at the 76th Academy Awards, setting the current Oscar
record for the highest clean sweep, and its 11 Academy Awards wins ties the
record held by _Ben-Hur_ (1959) and _Titanic_ (1997).[50] _The Return of the
King_ also became only the second sequel to win the Oscar for Best Picture
(after _The Godfather Part II_ ).

As well as Academy Awards, each film in the series won the Hugo Award for Best
Dramatic Presentation, the MTV Movie Award for Movie of the Year, and the
Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film. The first and third films also won the
BAFTA Award for Best Film. The New York Film Critics Circle awarded _The
Return of the King_ its Best Picture Award at the 2003 Awards Ceremony, hosted
by Andrew Johnston, chair of the organization at that time, who called it "a
masterful piece of filmmaking."[54]

—Christopher Tolkien, _Le Monde_[55]

The film series provoked both positive and negative reaction from fans and
scholars of the novels, and was sometimes seen as changing parts Tolkien felt
thematically necessary in terms of characters, themes, events and subtlety.
Some fans of the book who disagreed with such changes have released fan edits
of the films such as _The Lord of the Rings: The Purist Edition_ ,[56][57]
which removed many of the changes to bring them closer to the original.

It was rumoured that the Tolkien family became split on the series, with
Christopher Tolkien and his son Simon Tolkien feuding over whether or not it
was a good idea to adapt.[58] Christopher has since denied these claims,
saying, "My own position is that _The Lord of the Rings_ is peculiarly
unsuitable to transformation into visual dramatic form. The suggestions that
have been made that I 'disapprove' of the films, even to the extent of
thinking ill of those with whom I may differ, are wholly without foundation."
He added that he had never "expressed any such feeling".[59] In 2012, however,
he described the films as having "eviscerated" the book, and criticized the
resulting "commercialisation" of his father's work.[55][60]

Various changes to characters such as Gandalf, Aragorn, Arwen, Denethor,
Faramir, Gimli, and Frodo, when considered together, were seen by some to
alter the tone and themes found in the books. Several critics contend that the
portrayal of women, especially Arwen, in the films is thematically faithful to
(or compatible with) Tolkien's writings despite some
differences.[61][62][63][64] Wayne G. Hammond, a Tolkien scholar,[65][66] said
of the first two films that he found them to be "travesties as adaptations...
faithful only on a basic level of plot" and that many characters had not been
depicted faithfully to their appearance in the novel.[67][68] Janet Brennan
Croft criticized the films using Tolkien's own terms "anticipation" and
"flattening", which she used in critiquing a proposed film script. She
contrasts Tolkien's subtlety with Jackson's tendency to show "too much too
soon".[69] Other critics have argued that Tolkien's characters were weakened
and misinterpreted by their portrayal in the films.[70][71][72]

Changes to events, such as the Elves participating at the Battle of Helm's
Deep,[73] Faramir taking the hobbits to Osgiliath,[74] and the deletion of the
chapter "The Scouring of the Shire", are also seen as changing Tolkien's
themes.[74]

Supporters of the series assert that it is a worthy interpretation of the book
and that most of the changes were necessary.[6] Many who worked on the series
are fans of the book, including Christopher Lee, who (alone among the cast)
had actually met Tolkien in person,[75] and Boyens once noted that no matter
what, it is simply their interpretation of the book. Jackson once said that to
simply summarize the story on screen would be a mess, and in his own words,
"Sure, it's not really _The Lord of the Rings_... but it could still be a
pretty damn cool movie."[76][77] Other fans also claim that, despite any
changes, the films serve as a tribute to the book, appealing to those who have
not yet read it, and even leading some to do so. The Movie Guide for The
Encyclopedia of Arda (an online Tolkien encyclopedia) states that Jackson's
films were exceptional since filming the whole story of _The Lord of the
Rings_ was probably impossible.[78] This notion is partially supported by a
review published in 2005 that otherwise criticized a lack of "faithfulness to
Tolkien's spirit and tone."[79] Douglas Kellner argues that the conservative
community spirit of Tolkien's Shire is reflected in Jackson's films as well as
the division of the Fellowship into "squabbling races".[80] In a 2006 review,
film theorist Kristin Thompson was critical about the fact that film studies
were undertaken by literary researchers and about the frequent denigration of
Jackson's work in the collected essays.[81]

The first two films were released on standard two-disc edition DVDs containing
previews of the next film. The success of the theatrical cuts brought about
four-disc extended editions, with new editing, added special effects and
music.[82] The extended cuts of the films and the included special features
were spread over two discs, and a limited collector's edition was also
released. _The Fellowship of the Ring_ was released on 12 November 2002,
containing 30 minutes more footage, an Alan Lee painting of the Fellowship
entering Moria, and the Moria Gate on the back of the sleeve; an Argonath-
styled bookend was included with the Collector's Edition. _The Two Towers_ ,
released on 18 November 2003, contained 46 minutes extra footage and a Lee
painting of Gandalf the White's entrance; the Collector's Edition contained a
Sméagol statue, with a crueller-looking statue of his Gollum persona available
by order for a limited time.

_The Return of the King_ was released on 14 December 2004, having 52 minutes
more footage, a Lee painting of the Grey Havens and a model of Minas Tirith
for the Collector's Edition, with Minas Morgul available by order for a
limited time. The Special Extended DVD Editions also had in-sleeve maps of the
Fellowship's travels. They have also played at cinemas, most notably for a 16
December 2003 marathon screening (dubbed "Trilogy Tuesday") culminating in a
late afternoon screening of the third film. Attendees of "Trilogy Tuesday"
were given a limited edition keepsake from Sideshow Collectibles containing
one random frame of film from each of the three movies. Both versions were put
together in a Limited Edition "branching" version, plus a new feature-length
documentary by Costa Botes. The complete series was released in a six-disc set
on 14 November 2006.

Warner Bros. released the trilogy's theatrical versions on Blu-ray in a boxed
set on 6 April 2010.[83] An extended edition Blu-ray box set was made
available for pre-order from Amazon.com in March 2011 and was released on 28
June 2011.[84] Each film's extended Blu-ray version is identical to the
extended DVD version; the total running time is longer due to added credit
sequence listing the names of " _The Lord of the Rings_ fan-club members" who
contributed to the project.[85][86]

In 2014, brand new Blu-ray steelbook editions of the five-disc Extended
Editions were released. The first, _The Fellowship of the Ring_ , was released
on 24 March 2014.[87] The discs are identical to those found in the previous
five-disc Blu-ray set.[88]

The release of the films saw a surge of interest in _The Lord of the Rings_
and Tolkien's other works, vastly increasing his impact on popular
culture.[95] The success of the films spawned numerous video games and many
other kinds of merchandise.

As a result of the series' success, Peter Jackson has become a major figure in
the film business in the mould of Steven Spielberg and George Lucas, in the
process befriending some industry heavyweights like Bryan Singer and Frank
Darabont. Jackson has since founded his own film production company, Wingnut
Films, as well as Wingnut Interactive, a video game company. He was also
finally given a chance to remake _King Kong_ in 2005. The film was a critical
and box office success, although not as successful as _The Lord of the Rings_
series. Jackson has been called a "favourite son" of New Zealand.[96] In 2004,
Howard Shore toured with _The Lord of the Rings Symphony_ , playing two hours
of the score. Along with the _Harry Potter_ films, the series has renewed
interest in the fantasy film genre. Tourism in New Zealand is up, possibly due
to its exposure in the series,[97] with the country's tourism industry waking
up to an audience's familiarity.[98]

In December 2002, The Lord of the Rings Motion Picture Trilogy: The Exhibition
opened at the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa in Wellington. As of
2007, the exhibition has travelled to seven other cities around the world. A
musical adaptation of the book was launched in Toronto, Canada, in 2006, but
it closed after mostly poor reviews. A shortened version opened in London,
United Kingdom, in the summer of 2007.

The legacy of _The Lord of the Rings_ is also that of court cases over profits
from the trilogy. Sixteen cast members (Noel Appleby [de], Jed Brophy, Mark
Ferguson, Ray Henwood, Bruce Hopkins, William Johnson, Nathaniel Lees, Sarah
McLeod, Ian Mune, Paul Norell, Craig Parker, Robert Pollock, Martyn Sanderson,
Peter Tait and Stephen Ure [de]) sued over the lack of revenue from
merchandise bearing their appearance. The case was resolved out of court in
2008. The settlement came too late for Appleby, who died of cancer in
2007.[99] Saul Zaentz also filed a lawsuit in 2004 claiming he had not been
paid all of his royalties.

The next year, Jackson himself sued the studio over profits from the first
film, slowing development of the _Hobbit_ prequels until late 2007.[100] The
Tolkien Trust filed a lawsuit in February 2008, for violating Tolkien's
original deal over the rights that they would earn 7.5% of the gross from any
films based on his works.[101] The Trust sought compensation of $150
million.[102] A judge denied them this option, but allowed them to win
compensation from the act of the studio ignoring the contract itself.[103] On
8 September 2009, the dispute was settled.[104]

The success of _The Lord of the Rings_ trilogy led to Jackson directing a
trilogy of prequels based on Tolkien's children's book _The Hobbit_. The
films, which were released between 2012 and 2014, used much of the cast and
crew of _The Lord of the Rings_ , including Ian McKellen, Andy Serkis, Hugo
Weaving, Elijah Wood, Ian Holm, Christopher Lee, Cate Blanchett and Orlando
Bloom who reprised their roles. Although the _Hobbit_ films were commercially
successful, they received mixed reviews from critics.

Numerous video games were released to supplement the film series. They
include: _The Two Towers,_ Pinball, _The Return of the King_ , _The Third Age_
, _The Third Age_ (GBA), _Tactics_ , _The Battle for Middle-earth_ , _The
Battle for Middle-earth II_ , _The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the
Witch-king_ , _The Lord of the Rings Online_ , _Conquest_ , _Aragorn's Quest_
, _War in the North_ , _Lego The Lord of the Rings_ , _Guardians of Middle-
earth_ , _Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor_ , and _Middle-earth: Shadow of War_.

