The **Florida Institute of Technology** ( **Florida Tech** or **FIT** ) is a
private nonprofit doctoral/research university in Melbourne, Florida.[5] The
university comprises four academic colleges: Engineering & Science,
Aeronautics, Psychology & Liberal Arts, and Business.[6] Approximately half of
FIT's students are enrolled in the College of Engineering.[7] The university's
130-acre primary residential campus is located near the Orlando Melbourne
International Airport and the Florida Tech Research Park.[8] It is about 50
miles (80 km) from the Kennedy Space Center and 75 miles (121 km) from
Orlando.

The university was founded in 1958 as **Brevard Engineering College** and has
been known by its present name since 1966.[9] In 2013, Florida Tech had an on-
campus student body of 4,633, almost equally divided between graduate- and
undergraduate-level students with the majority of them focusing their studies
on engineering and the sciences.[3]

Florida Institute of Technology was founded in 1958 as Brevard Engineering
College to support NASA by Dr. Jerome P. Keuper, who became the first
president.[9] The first concept for the school was developed under the name
Brevard Engineering Institute. Classes were originally held at the Melbourne
Municipal Airport in buildings formerly used by the Naval Air Station
Melbourne.[10] In 1961, the university moved to its current location in
Melbourne, Florida.[11] During the 1960s additional classroom and laboratory
buildings, a library (formally dedicated on 23 January 1965), the Denius
Student Center, Hedgecock Gymnasium, Gleason Auditorium and several
dormitories were constructed.[11][12] In 1961, the first graduate received an
associate degree. The university was accredited by the Southern Association of
Colleges and Schools in 1964[13] and officially changed its name to Florida
Institute of Technology in 1966. Also in 1966, Dr. Jack Morelock founded the
Department of Oceanography. In 1967, the School of Aeronautics was created.
Defense scientist and NASA would meet with students recruiting for the space
program. In 1969, the Panther Battalion Army ROTC program was formed.[9] In
1970, the college merged with Aerospace Technical Institute to form the School
of Aeronautics.

In 1972, the university launched its first off-campus program at the request
of the United States Navy.[12][14]

The Evans Library was completed in the early 1984.[15] The following year the
original library was renovated and dedicated as the Jerome P. Keuper
Administration Building.[12] In 1988, the Homer R. Denius Student Center was
renovated, the student plaza completed, and the applied research laboratory
building acquired.[11] The Claude Pepper Institute for Aging and Therapeutic
Research and Skurla Hall, home of the School of Aeronautics, opened in 1990.
In 1997, the university received a $50 million grant from the F. W. Olin
Foundation.[16] An engineering building and life sciences building were opened
in 1999 in result of the grant.[17][18]

Seven new residence halls were completed in 2003.[12] Each resident hall was
named after one of the seven fallen astronauts of the Shuttle Columbia
disaster and dedicated to their memory.[12] In 2004, Florida Tech obtained
National Science Foundation (NSF) funding to build a 24-inch telescope atop
the newly completed F.W. Olin Physical Sciences Center. However, Melbourne
Beach resident Jim Ortega, who had retired from the University of Virginia to
Florida in 1998, stepped forward with the additional funds needed to secure a
32-inch telescope. In gratitude to this donation, the telescope was named the
Ortega Telescope. In 2005, the F.W. Olin Physical Sciences Center opened.[12]

Construction on the Emil Buehler Center for Aviation Training and Research at
Melbourne International Airport began in 2008.[19] The following year, the
College of Business became the Nathan M. Bisk College of Business, and the
Ruth Funk Center for Textile Arts, the Emil Buehler Center for Aviation
Training and Research at the Melbourne International Airport, the Scott Center
for Autism Treatment, the Harris Center for Science and Engineering and the
Harris Institute for Information Assurance were opened.[12]

In 2009, the college began offering online degrees. November 20, 2015, marked
the unveiling of the Harris Student Design Center, an 11,500 square foot
building on the south side of campus.[20] This facility provides space for
students completing design projects. In 2016, the Center for Advanced
Manufacturing and Innovative Design (CAMID) and the Larsen Motorsports High
Performance Vehicles & Research Development Center opened at the Research and
Development Center on Palm Bay Road.

The university established its football program in 2010.[21] The Panther
Aquatic Center was opened a year later.[12] In 2011, the university partnered
with the Brevard Art Museum and established it as the Foosaner Art
Museum.[22][23]

The Harry P. Weber University Archives opened in 2014. It was named after
professor emeritus Harry Weber, who first joined the college in 1966 and was
instrumental in establishing the archives. The archive collection serves to
preserve the history of the institution and it is located in the Evans
Library.[24]

Florida Institute of Technology's Jensen Beach Campus, also known as School of
Marine and Environmental Technology or (SOMET), was a specialized branch
campus located on the former campus of Saint Joseph College of Florida on the
Indian River Lagoon in Jensen Beach, Florida, approximately 50 miles south of
the university's main campus.[1] The campus attracted oceanography, underwater
technology and other assorted marine biology students. The National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration had more officers that are graduates of FIT in
Jensen Beach than from any other campus or college in the country. The SOMET
was transferred to the main campus and became the Department of Marine and
Environmental Sciences (DMES). The campus closed after the transition in 1986.
In 2016, DMES was renamed Department of Ocean Engineering and Sciences (DOES)
to communicate the department's focus.[25]

The university's 130-acre main campus is located in Melbourne, Florida, on
what is known as the Space Coast region along the Atlantic Ocean.[7] The
university offers many student services including tutoring, health services,
health insurance, and campus safety.[7] Florida Tech has six residence halls
and three apartment style accommodations for on-campus living.[26]

Florida Tech offers specialized graduate degree programs through sites in
Huntsville, Alabama, Fort Eustis, Virginia, Fort Lee, Virginia, Alexandria,
Virginia, Quantico, Virginia, Roanoke, Virginia, Dover, New Jersey, Naval Air
Engineering Station Lakehurst, Lexington Park, Maryland, Aberdeen Proving
Ground, Kennedy Space Center, Rockledge, Florida, Melbourne, Florida and
Orlando, Florida.[27]

In fall 2017, Florida Tech enrolled 4,945 students at the main campus; 1,457
at off-campus locations; and 2,537 online for a total of 8,939 students.[28]
The male to female ratio in the student body was 71:29.[2] 74% of all students
came from the United States, 35% of students were from Florida and 25% of all
students came from other countries. In 2017, the average combined verbal and
math SAT score of incoming freshmen at the undergraduate level of Florida Tech
was 1160.[29]

The university offers degrees in a variety of science and engineering
disciplines and is one of the few universities to offer aviation degrees. The
university is divided into four academic units: College of Aeronautics,
College of Engineering and Science, Nathan Bisk College of Business, College
of Psychology and Liberal Arts.[6]

Florida Institute of Technology is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of
the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS).[13] The Engineering
programs are also accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of
the Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET).[30] The
Computer Science program is accredited by the Computer Science Accreditation
Commission of the Computing Sciences Accreditation Board. Florida Tech's
chemistry program is accredited by the Committee on Professional Training of
the American Chemical Society. Aeronautical Science and Aviation Management
programs are accredited by the Council on Aviation Accreditation. The Clinical
Psychology PsyD program is accredited by the American Psychological
Association and the graduate Behavior Analysis programs by the Association for
Behavior Analysis International (ABAI).

Times Higher Education ranks Florida Tech as one of the top 800 universities
in the world and 213th in the U.S.[37] FIT is also listed as a top 800 world
university in the Shanghai rankings.[38] U.S. News & World Report rankis
Florida Tech 177th among national universities in the U.S.[39]

PayScale ranks Florida Tech 123rd in the U.S. based on return on investment
(ROI).[40] In 2012, Bloomberg rated Florida Tech as the best Florida college
in ROI, using their own methodology and data from PayScale.[41] The Brookings
Institution ranked Florida Tech first in Florida and 94th nationally for
alumni earnings in 2015, also using data from PayScale.[42] CollegeNET and
PayScale ranked Florida Tech 902nd out of 1,363 colleges for enabling social
mobility in 2017.[43]

In 2018, Niche ranked FIT 190th out of 1,647 colleges in America after
surveying students and recent alumni about their experiences on and off
campus.[44] The university received A's in the areas of academics, value,
professors, diversity, campus food, and student life.[45]

Barron's ranks Florida Tech a "best buy" in college education.[46] Florida
Tech is also listed as a top technical institution in the Fiske Guide to
Colleges.[47] Florida Tech was named by Times Higher Education as one of the
top universities in the United States for graduate employability in 2016.[48]

In 2016, Florida Tech was awarded $18.9 million in external research
funding.[49] From 2009 to 2012, the number of Florida Tech faculty who serve
as principal investigators increased by 100% including four recipients of the
National Science Foundation (NSF) Career Awards.[50] During this time period,
five new interdisciplinary research institutes were initiated that are the
focal point for Florida Tech undergraduate and graduate research. These new
research university institutes include:

Other research facilities include:

In the college of engineering, some of the research laboratories and research
groups include:

Faculty and students in the Physics/Space Science department conduct research
in Astronomy and Astrophysics, Planetary Sciences, High Energy Physics
(experimental particle physics), Lightning, Solid State and Condensed Matter
Physics, and Space and Magnetospheric Physics.

Florida Tech's athletic teams are known as the Panthers.[61] The school fields
20 sports, 10 each for men and women, at the NCAA Division II level and is a
member of the Sunshine State Conference.[61] The sports include: baseball,
men's and women's basketball, men's and women's crew, men's and women's cross
country, football, men's and women's golf, men's lacrosse, men's and women's
soccer, softball, men's and women's swimming & diving, men's and women's
tennis, and women's volleyball.[62] The men's and women's swimming & diving
teams were added in fall 2011 and men's lacrosse in Spring 2012.[63] In 2010,
the university announced plans to create a football program with competition
possibly beginning in 2013.[64] The football program had its inaugural season
in 2013 and went on to win its first game, its first homecoming game, and its
first bowl game.[65] The football team plays in the NCAA Division II Gulf
South Conference as an affiliate member.[66] In 2015, Florida Tech Track
joined the Peach Belt Conference as associate members.

Boston Red Sox pitcher Tim Wakefield attended Florida Tech and set the home
run record in 1987 as a first baseman.[67][68] His number (3) was retired in
2006.[69]

Florida Tech won the NCAA Division II National Championship in Men's soccer in
1988 and 1991.[70]

Florida Tech's Daniela Iacobelli won the National NCAA Division II Woman's
Golf Championship in 2007.[71]

Florida Tech has six traditional residence halls, an eight-building Southgate
Apartments complex, the seven-building Columbia Village suites and the three-
building Harris Village suites.

Florida Tech runs apartment-style housing options located near campus at Mary
Star of the Sea - Newman Hall and Panther Bay Apartments.[72]

Florida Institute of Technology has 132 active student organizations on
campus.[73] The university-sponsored student organizations, such as Student
Government Association, Campus Activities Board, the Homecoming Committee,
FITV (CCTV Channel 99 on campus), and The Crimson (student-run university
newspaper) operate in primary university funding.[73] Some organizations are
run by membership dues, such as the many fraternities and sororities on
campus, as well as certain professional organizations like American Society of
Civil Engineers (ASCE), IEEE and AIAA. Other organizations are operated via
Student Activities Funding Committee funding, overseen by the Student
Government Association Treasurer. Organizations like Residence Hall
Association, ACM, Anime Club, and others are operated by SAFC funding. Arts,
media, and performance organizations include: Amateur Radio Club, Belletrist,
College Players, Dance Association, Film Society, FITV, Florida Tech Pep Band,
The Crimson and WFIT.[73]

Students at Florida Tech have the opportunity to participate in a number of
club and intramural sports in addition to the varsity athletics programs.[74]
The university offers intramural sports Flag Football, Ultimate Frisbee,
martial arts, paintball, Disc Golf and Judo.[74] Sport clubs include ice
hockey, soccer, table tennis, Collegiate wrestling and baseball.[73] The
Florida Tech ice hockey program is a member of the American Collegiate Hockey
Association, playing at that organization's Division 3 level.[75]

Florida Tech has a number of Greek life opportunities for students. The
university's fraternities include Alpha Tau Omega, Lambda Chi Alpha, Chi Phi,
Delta Tau Delta, Lambda Chi Alpha, Pi Kappa Alpha, Pi Lambda Phi, Sigma Tau
Gamma and Tau Kappa Epsilon.[76] Its sororities include Alpha Phi, Gamma Phi
Beta and Phi Sigma Sigma.[76] Florida Tech also has a chapter of Alpha Phi
Omega co-ed service fraternity. Squamish, a co-ed fraternal organization, also
exists on campus, although it is not Greek life affiliated.[77]

The university offers a number of national and international Honor Societies
including the Beta Beta Beta Biological Honor Society, Chi Epsilon a Civil
Engineering Students honor society, Delta Mu Delta business honor society, Phi
Eta Sigma National Honor Society for freshman class academic achievement, Phi
Kappa Phi general academic honor society, Psi Chi honor society of psychology,
Tau Beta Pi national engineering honor society and Upsilon Pi Epsilon
computing and information systems honor society.[78]

The university publishes the _Florida Tech Crimson_ , a student published
newspaper.[79] The Crimson won a Society of Professional Journalists Regional
Mark of Excellence Award in 2014 for best in-depth reporting at a small school
(less than 9,999 students).[80] In 2016, the College of Aeronautics launched
an on-line publication, the _International Journal of Aviation Sciences_.[81]

On 1 July 2016, T. Dwayne McCay assumed role as President. Previous presidents
include:

