**Fort Ticonderoga** (/taɪkɒndəˈroʊɡə/), formerly **Fort Carillon** , is a
large 18th-century star fort built by the French at a narrows near the south
end of Lake Champlain, in northern New York, in the United States. It was
constructed by Canadian-born French military engineer Michel Chartier de
Lotbinière, Marquis de Lotbinière between October 1755 and 1757, during the
action in the "North American theater" of the Seven Years' War, often referred
to in the US as the French and Indian War. The fort was of strategic
importance during the 18th-century colonial conflicts between Great Britain
and France, and again played an important role during the American
Revolutionary War.

The site controlled a river portage alongside the mouth of the rapids-infested
La Chute River, in the 3.5 miles (5.6 km) between Lake Champlain and Lake
George. It was thus strategically placed for the competition over trade routes
between the British-controlled Hudson River Valley and the French-controlled
Saint Lawrence River Valley.

The terrain amplified the importance of the site. Both lakes were long and
narrow and oriented north–south, as were the many ridge lines of the
Appalachian Mountains, which extended as far south as Georgia. The mountains
created nearly impassable terrains to the east and west of the Great
Appalachian Valley that the site commanded.

The name "Ticonderoga" comes from the Iroquois word _tekontaró:ken_ , meaning
"it is at the junction of two waterways".[3]

During the 1758 Battle of Carillon, 4,000 French defenders were able to repel
an attack by 16,000 British troops near the fort. In 1759, the British
returned and drove a token French garrison from the fort. During the American
Revolutionary War, when the British controlled the fort, it was attacked in
May 1775 in the Capture of Fort Ticonderoga by the Green Mountain Boys and
other state militia under the command of Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold, who
captured it in the surprise attack. Cannons taken from the fort were
transported to Boston to lift its siege by the British, who evacuated the city
in March 1776. The Americans held the fort until June 1777, when British
forces under General John Burgoyne occupied high ground above it; the threat
resulted in the Continental Army troops being withdrawn from the fort and its
surrounding defenses. The only direct attack on the fort during the Revolution
took place in September 1777, when John Brown led 500 Americans in an
unsuccessful attempt to capture the fort from about 100 British defenders.

The British abandoned the fort after the failure of the Saratoga campaign, and
it ceased to be of military value after 1781. After gaining independence, the
United States allowed the fort to fall into ruin; local residents stripped it
of much of its usable materials. Purchased by a private family in 1820, it
became a stop on tourist routes of the area. Early in the 20th century, its
private owners restored the fort. A foundation now operates the fort as a
tourist attraction, museum, and research center.

Lake Champlain, which forms part of the border between New York and Vermont,
and the Hudson River together formed an important travel route that was used
by Indians long before the arrival of European colonists. The route was
relatively free of obstacles to navigation, with only a few portages. One
strategically important place on the route lies at a narrows near the southern
end of Lake Champlain, where Ticonderoga Creek, known in colonial times as the
La Chute River, because it was named by French colonists, enters the lake,
carrying water from Lake George. Although the site provides commanding views
of the southern extent of Lake Champlain, Mount Defiance, at 853 ft (260 m),
and two other hills (Mount Hope and Mount Independence) overlook the area.[4]

Indians had occupied the area for centuries before French explorer Samuel de
Champlain first arrived there in 1609. Champlain recounted that the
Algonquins, with whom he was traveling, battled a group of Iroquois nearby.[5]
In 1642, French missionary Isaac Jogues was the first white man to traverse
the portage at Ticonderoga while escaping a battle between the Iroquois and
members of the Huron tribe.[6]

The French, who had colonized the Saint Lawrence River valley to the north,
and the English, who had taken over the Dutch settlements that became the
Province of New York to the south, began contesting the area as early as 1691,
when Pieter Schuyler built a small wooden fort at the Ticonderoga point on the
western shore of the lake.[7] These colonial conflicts reached their height in
the French and Indian War, which began in 1754 as the North American front of
the Seven Years' War.[8]

In 1755, following the Battle of Lake George, the French decided to construct
a fort here. Marquis de Vaudreuil, the governor of the French Province of
Canada, sent his cousin Michel Chartier de Lotbinière to design and construct
a fortification at this militarily important site, which the French called
Fort Carillon.[9] The name "Carillon" has variously been attributed to the
name of a former French officer, Philippe de Carrion du Fresnoy, who
established a trading post at the site in the late 17th century,[10] or (more
commonly) to the sounds made by the rapids of the La Chute River, which were
said to resemble the chiming bells of a carillon.[11] Construction on the
star-shaped fort, which Lotbinière based on designs of the renowned French
military engineer Vauban, began in October 1755 and then proceeded slowly
during the warmer-weather months of 1756 and 1757, using troops stationed at
nearby Fort St. Frédéric and from Canada.[12][13]

The work in 1755 consisted primarily of beginning construction on the main
walls and on the Lotbinière redoubt, an outwork to the west of the site that
provided additional coverage of the La Chute River. During the next year, the
four main bastions were built, as well as a sawmill on the La Chute. Work
slowed in 1757, when many of the troops prepared for and participated in the
attack on Fort William Henry. The barracks and demi-lunes were not completed
until spring 1758.[14]

The French built the fort to control the south end of Lake Champlain and
prevent the British from gaining military access to the lake. Consequently,
its most important defenses, the Reine and Germaine bastions, were directed to
the northeast and northwest, away from the lake, with two demi-lunes further
extending the works on the land side. The Joannes and Languedoc bastions
overlooked the lake to the south, providing cover for the landing area outside
the fort. The walls were seven feet (2.1 meters) high and fourteen feet (4.3
meters) thick, and the whole works was surrounded by a glacis and a dry moat
five feet (1.5 meters) deep and 15 feet (4.6 m) wide. When the walls were
first erected in 1756, they were made of squared wooden timbers, with earth
filling the gap. The French then began to dress the walls with stone from a
quarry about one mile (1.6 km) away, although this work was never fully
completed.[11] When the main defenses became ready for use, the fort was armed
with cannons hauled from Montreal and Fort St. Frédéric.[15][16]

The fort contained three barracks and four storehouses. One bastion held a
bakery capable of producing 60 loaves of bread a day. A powder magazine was
hacked out of the bedrock beneath the Joannes bastion. All the construction
within the fort was of stone.[11]

A wooden palisade protected an area outside the fort between the southern wall
and the lake shore. This area contained the main landing for the fort and
additional storage facilities and other works necessary for maintenance of the
fort.[11] When it became apparent in 1756 that the fort was too far to the
west of the lake, the French constructed an additional redoubt to the east to
enable cannon to cover the lake's narrows.[17]

Officers' barracks, right; soldiers' barracks, left

Inside the first wall; officers' barracks at left, soldiers' barracks at right

Store room and powder magazine (now Mars Education Center); soldiers' barracks
at right

Front of the fort

View of the lake from the front

Back view of the fort

By 1758, the fort was largely complete; the only ongoing work thereafter
consisted of dressing the walls with stone. Still, General Montcalm and two of
his military engineers surveyed the works in 1758 and found something to
criticize in almost every aspect of the fort's construction; the buildings
were too tall and thus easier for attackers' cannon fire to hit, the powder
magazine leaked, and the masonry was of poor quality.[18] The critics
apparently failed to notice the fort's significant strategic weakness: several
nearby hills overlooked the fort and made it possible for besiegers to fire
down on the defenders from above.[19] Lotbinière, who may have won the job of
building the fort only because he was related to Governor Vaudreuil, had lost
a bid to become Canada's chief engineer to Nicolas Sarrebource de Pontleroy,
one of the two surveying engineers, in 1756, all of which may explain the
highly negative report. Lotbinière's career suffered for years afterwards.[20]

William Nester, in his exhaustive analysis of the Battle of Carillon, notes
additional problems with the fort's construction. The fort was small for a
Vauban-style fort, about 500 feet (150 m) wide, with a barracks capable of
holding only 400 soldiers. Storage space inside the fort was similarly
limited, requiring the storage of provisions outside the fort's walls in
exposed places. Its cistern was small, and the water quality was supposedly
poor.[21][22]

In August 1757, the French captured Fort William Henry in an action launched
from Fort Carillon.[23] This, and a string of other French victories in 1757,
prompted the British to organize a large-scale attack on the fort as part of a
multi-campaign strategy against French Canada.[24] In June 1758, British
General James Abercromby began amassing a large force at Fort William Henry in
preparation for the military campaign directed up the Champlain Valley. These
forces landed at the north end of Lake George, only four miles from the fort,
on July 6.[25] The French general Louis-Joseph de Montcalm, who had only
arrived at Carillon in late June, engaged his troops in a flurry of work to
improve the fort's outer defenses. They built, over two days, entrenchments
around a rise between the fort and Mount Hope, about three-quarters of a mile
(one kilometer) northwest of the fort, and then constructed an abatis (felled
trees with sharpened branches pointing out) below these entrenchments.[26]
They conducted the work unimpeded by military action, as Abercromby failed to
advance directly to the fort on July 7. Abercromby's second-in-command,
Brigadier General George Howe, had been killed when his column encountered a
French reconnaissance troop. Abercromby "felt [Howe's death] most heavily" and
may have been unwilling to act immediately.[27]

On July 8, 1758, Abercromby ordered a frontal attack against the hastily
assembled French works. Abercromby tried to move rapidly against the few
French defenders, opting to forgo field cannon and relying instead on the
numerical superiority of his 16,000 troops. In the Battle of Carillon, the
British were soundly defeated by the 4,000 French defenders.[28] The battle
took place far enough away from the fort that its guns were rarely used.[29]
The battle gave the fort a reputation for impregnability, which affected
future military operations in the area, notably during the American
Revolutionary War.[30] Following the French victory, Montcalm, anticipating
further British attacks, ordered additional work on the defenses, including
the construction of the Germain and Pontleroy redoubts (named for the
engineers under whose direction they were constructed) to the northeast of the
fort.[31][32] However, the British did not attack again in 1758, so the French
withdrew all but a small garrison of men for the winter in November.[33]

The British under General Jeffery Amherst captured the fort the following year
in the 1759 Battle of Ticonderoga. In this confrontation 11,000 British
troops, using emplaced artillery, drove off the token garrison of 400
Frenchmen. The French, in withdrawing, used explosives to destroy what they
could of the fort[34] and spiked or dumped cannons that they did not take with
them. Although the British worked in 1759 and 1760 to repair and improve the
fort,[35] it was not part of any further significant action in the war. After
the war, the British garrisoned the fort with a small number of troops and
allowed it to fall into disrepair. Colonel Frederick Haldimand, in command of
the fort in 1773, wrote that it was in "ruinous condition".[36]

In 1775, Fort Ticonderoga, in disrepair, was still manned by a token British
force. They found it extremely useful as a supply and communication link
between Canada (which they had taken over after their victory in the Seven
Years' War) and New York.[37] On May 10, 1775, less than one month after the
American Revolutionary War was ignited with the battles of Lexington and
Concord, the British garrison of 48 soldiers was surprised by a small force of
Green Mountain Boys, along with militia volunteers from Massachusetts and
Connecticut, led by Ethan Allen and Benedict Arnold.[38] Allen claims to have
said, "Come out you old Rat!" to the fort's commander, Captain William
Delaplace.[39] He also later said that he demanded that the British commander
surrender the fort "In the name of the Great Jehovah and the Continental
Congress!"; however, his surrender demand was made to Lieutenant Jocelyn
Feltham and not the fort's commander, who did later appear and surrender his
sword.[39]

With the capture of the fort, the Patriot forces obtained a large supply of
cannons and other armaments, much of which Henry Knox transported to Boston
during the winter of 1775–1776. Ticonderoga's cannons were instrumental in
ending the Siege of Boston when they were used to fortify Dorchester
Heights.[40] With Dorchester Heights secured by the Patriots, the British were
forced to evacuate the city in March 1776.[37] The capture of Fort Ticonderoga
by the Patriots made communication between the British Canadian and American
commands much more difficult.

Benedict Arnold remained in control of the fort until 1,000 Connecticut troops
under the command of Benjamin Hinman arrived in June 1775. Because of a series
of political maneuvers and miscommunications, Arnold was never notified that
Hinman was to take command. After a delegation from Massachusetts (which had
issued Arnold's commission) arrived to clarify the matter, Arnold resigned his
commission and departed, leaving the fort in Hinman's hands.[41]

Beginning in July 1775, Ticonderoga was used as a staging area for the
invasion of Quebec, planned to begin in September. Under the leadership of
generals Philip Schuyler and Richard Montgomery, men and materiel for the
invasion were accumulated there through July and August.[42] On August 28,
after receiving word that British forces at Fort Saint-Jean, not far from the
New York–Quebec border, were nearing completion of boats to launch onto Lake
Champlain, Montgomery launched the invasion, leading 1,200 troops down the
lake.[43] Ticonderoga continued to serve as a staging base for the action in
Quebec until the battle and siege at Quebec City that resulted in Montgomery's
death.[44]

In May 1776, British troops began to arrive at Quebec City, where they broke
the Continental Army's siege.[45] The British chased the American forces back
to Ticonderoga in June and, after several months of shipbuilding, moved down
Lake Champlain under Guy Carleton in October. The British destroyed a small
fleet of American gunboats in the Battle of Valcour Island in mid-October, but
snow was already falling, so the British retreated to winter quarters in
Quebec. About 1,700 troops from the Continental Army, under the command of
Colonel Anthony Wayne, wintered at Ticonderoga.[44][46] The British offensive
resumed the next year in the Saratoga campaign under General John
Burgoyne.[47]

During the summer of 1776, the Americans, under the direction of General
Schuyler, and later under General Horatio Gates, added substantial defensive
works to the area. Mount Independence, which is almost completely surrounded
by water, was fortified with trenches near the water, a horseshoe battery part
way up the side, a citadel at the summit, and redoubts armed with cannons
surrounding the summit area. These defenses were linked to Ticonderoga with a
pontoon bridge that was protected by land batteries on both sides. The works
on Mount Hope, the heights above the site of Montcalm's victory, were improved
to include a star-shaped fort. Mount Defiance remained unfortified.[48]

In March 1777, American generals were strategizing about possible British
military movements and considered an attempt on the Hudson River corridor a
likely possibility. General Schuyler, heading the forces stationed at
Ticonderoga, requested 10,000 troops to guard Ticonderoga and 2,000 to guard
the Mohawk River valley against British invasion from the north. George
Washington, who had never been to Ticonderoga (his only visit was to be in
1783),[49] believed that an overland attack from the north was unlikely,
because of the alleged impregnability of Ticonderoga.[30] This, combined with
continuing incursions up the Hudson River valley by British forces occupying
New York City, led Washington to believe that any attack on the Albany area
would be from the south, which, as it was part of the supply line to
Ticonderoga, would necessitate a withdrawal from the fort. As a result, no
significant actions were taken to further fortify Ticonderoga or significantly
increase its garrison.[50] The garrison, about 2,000 men under General Arthur
St. Clair, was too small to man all the defenses.[51]

General Gates, who oversaw the northern defenses, was aware that Mount
Defiance threatened the fort.[52] John Trumbull had pointed this out as early
as 1776, when a shot fired from the fort was able to reach Defiance's summit,
and several officers inspecting the hill noted that there were approaches to
its summit where gun carriages could be pulled up the sides.[52] As the
garrison was too small to properly defend all the existing works in area,
Mount Defiance was left undefended.[53] Anthony Wayne left Ticonderoga in
April 1777 to join Washington's army; he reported to Washington that "all was
well", and that the fort "can never be carried, without much loss of
blood".[54]

British Major General William Phillips, as his men brought cannon to the top
of Mount Defiance in 1777

General Burgoyne led 7,800 British and Hessian forces south from Quebec in
June 1777.[55] After occupying nearby Fort Crown Point without opposition on
June 30, he prepared to besiege Ticonderoga.[56] Burgoyne realized the
tactical advantage of the high ground, and had his troops haul cannons to the
top of Mount Defiance. Faced with bombardment from the heights (although no
shots had yet been fired), General St. Clair ordered Ticonderoga abandoned on
July 5, 1777. Burgoyne's troops moved in the next day,[57] with advance guards
pursuing the retreating Patriot Americans.[58] Washington, on hearing of
Burgoyne's advance and the retreat from Ticonderoga, stated that the event was
"not apprehended, nor within the compass of my reasoning".[59] News of the
abandonment of the "Impregnable Bastion" without a fight, caused "the greatest
surprise and alarm" throughout the colonies.[60] After public outcry over his
actions, General St. Clair was court-martialed in 1778. He was cleared on all
charges.[59]

Following the British capture of Ticonderoga, it and the surrounding defenses
were garrisoned by 700 British and Hessian troops under the command of
Brigadier General Henry Watson Powell. Most of these forces were on Mount
Independence, with only 100 each at Fort Ticonderoga and a blockhouse they
were constructing on top of Mount Defiance.[61] George Washington sent General
Benjamin Lincoln into Vermont to "divide and distract the enemy".[62] Aware
that the British were housing American prisoners in the area, Lincoln decided
to test the British defenses. On September 13, he sent 500 men to Skenesboro,
which they found the British had abandoned, and 500 each against the defenses
on either side of the lake at Ticonderoga. Colonel John Brown led the troops
on the west side, with instructions to release prisoners if possible, and
attack the fort if it seemed feasible.[63]

Early on September 18, Brown's troops surprised a British contingent holding
some prisoners near the Lake George landing, while a detachment of his troops
sneaked up Mount Defiance, and captured most of the sleeping construction
crew. Brown and his men then moved down the portage trail toward the fort,
surprising more troops and releasing prisoners along the way.[64] The fort's
occupants were unaware of the action until Brown's men and British troops
occupying the old French lines skirmished. At this point Brown's men dragged
two captured six-pound guns up to the lines, and began firing on the fort. The
men who had captured Mount Defiance began firing a twelve-pounder from that
site.[65] The column that was to attack Mount Independence was delayed, and
its numerous defenders were alerted to the action at the fort below before the
attack on their position began. Their musket fire, as well as grapeshot fired
from ships anchored nearby, intimidated the Americans sufficiently that they
never launched an assault on the defensive positions on Mount
Independence.[65] A stalemate persisted, with regular exchanges of cannon
fire, until September 21, when 100 Hessians, returning from the Mohawk Valley
to support Burgoyne, arrived on the scene to provide reinforcement to the
besieged fort.[66] Brown eventually sent a truce party to the fort to open
negotiations; the party was fired on, and three of its five members were
killed.[67] Brown, realizing that the weaponry they had was insufficient to
take the fort, decided to withdraw. Destroying many bateaux and seizing a ship
on Lake George, he set off to annoy British positions on that lake.[67] His
action resulted in the freeing of 118 Americans and the capture of 293 British
troops, while suffering fewer than ten casualties.[65]

Following Burgoyne's defeat at Saratoga, the fort at Ticonderoga became
increasingly irrelevant. The British abandoned it and nearby Fort Crown Point
in November 1777, destroying both as best they could prior to their
withdrawal.[68] The fort was occasionally reoccupied by British raiding
parties in the following years, but it no longer held a prominent strategic
role in the war. It was finally abandoned by the British for good in 1781,
following their surrender at Yorktown.[69] In the years following the war,
area residents stripped the fort of usable building materials, even melting
some of the cannons down for their metal .[70]

In 1785, the fort's lands became the property of the state of New York. The
state donated the property to Columbia and Union colleges in 1803.[71] The
colleges sold the property to William Ferris Pell in 1820.[72]

Pell first used the property as a summer retreat. Completion of railroads and
canals connecting the area to New York City brought tourists to the area,[73]
so he converted his summer house, known as The Pavilion, into a hotel to serve
the tourist trade. In 1848, the Hudson River School artist Russell Smith
painted _Ruins of Fort Ticonderoga_ , depicting the condition of the fort.[74]

The Pell family, a politically important clan with influence throughout
American history (from William C. C. Claiborne, the first Governor of
Louisiana, to a Senator from Rhode Island, Claiborne Pell), hired English
architect Alfred Bossom to restore the fort and formally opened it to the
public in 1909 as an historic site. The ceremonies, which commemorated the
300th anniversary of the discovery of Lake Champlain by European explorers,
were attended by President William Howard Taft.[75] Stephen Hyatt Pell, who
spearheaded the restoration effort, founded the Fort Ticonderoga Association
in 1931, which is now responsible for the fort.[76] Funding for the
restoration also came from Robert M. Thompson, father of Stephen Pell's wife,
Sarah Gibbs Thompson.[77]

Between 1900 and 1950, the foundation acquired the historically important
lands around the fort, including Mount Defiance, Mount Independence, and much
of Mount Hope.[78] The fort was rearmed with fourteen 24-pound cannons
provided by the British government. These cannons had been cast in England for
use during the American Revolution, but the war ended before they were shipped
over.[79]

Designated as a National Historic Landmark by the Department of Interior, the
fort is now operated by the foundation as a tourist attraction, early American
military museum, and research center. The fort opens annually around May 10,
the anniversary of the 1775 capture, and closes in late October.[80]

The fort has been on a watchlist of National Historic Landmarks since 1998,
because of the poor condition of some of the walls and of the 19th-century
pavilion constructed by William Ferris Pell.[2] The pavilion was being
restored in 2009. In 2008, the powder magazine, destroyed by the French in
1759, was reconstructed by Tonetti Associates Architects,[81] based in part on
the original 1755 plans.[82] Also in 2008, the withdrawal of a major backer's
financial support forced the museum, which was facing significant budget
deficits, to consider selling one of its major art works, Thomas Cole's
_Gelyna, View near Ticonderoga_. However, fundraising activities were
successful enough to prevent the sale.[83]

The not-for-profit Living History Education Foundation conducts teacher
programs at Fort Ticonderoga during the summer that last approximately one
week. The program trains teachers how to teach Living History techniques, and
to understand and interpret the importance of Fort Ticonderoga during the
French and Indian War and the American Revolution.[84]

The fort conducts other seminars, symposia, and workshops throughout the year,
including the annual War College of the Seven Years' War in May and the
Seminar on the American Revolution in September.[85]

The Pell family estate is located north of the fort. In 1921, Sarah Pell
undertook reconstruction of the gardens. She hired Marian Cruger Coffin, one
of the most famous American landscape architects of the period. In 1995, the
gardens were restored and later opened for public visiting; they are known as
the King's Garden.[86]

The US Navy has given the name 'Ticonderoga' to five different vessels, as
well as to entire classes of cruisers and aircraft carriers.[87][88]

The fort was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1960.[2] Included in the
landmarked area are the fort, as well as Mount Independence and Mount
Defiance.[89] It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in
1966.[2] The Ticonderoga pencil, manufactured by the Dixon Ticonderoga
Corporation, is named for the fort.[90]

