**Fox** is a Southeast Asian pay television channel, owned and operated by Fox
Networks Group Asia Pacific, a subsidiary of Walt Disney Direct-to-Consumer
and International.

In Japan, the channel launched in February 1998 along with other Fox channels
such as Fox Crime and Fox Life (now FOX bs238).

In Asia, the channel was in test broadcast in December 2009, broadcasting US
TV series on loop. The first Asian provider who carried Fox was SkyCable in
the Philippines which launched the channel on 4 January 2010, followed by
StarHub TV in Singapore on 1 February 2010. Other TV providers across the
region followed thereafter.[1]

Around early-to-mid-February 2012, the Fox wordmark was changed to the Fox HD
wordmark _(pictured)_ for all Fox commercials on all Fox channels in the Asian
and Filipino television provider networks, including channels which are not in
HD. This change is similar to the one done to STAR World. The reason for this
change is unknown.

From May 2014, all FOX commercials are now added the Facebook page near the
time and date showing. The reason of this change is unknown.

Fox Japan and Fox Korea are considered separated from the main feed as they
have different programming. However, they are closely linked as they shared
most of their commercials and the programming are nearly the same.

Fox Taiwan was officially launched on September 1, 2012, as **FOX Showbiz**
(Chinese: 娛樂台) replacing Channel V Taiwan. This feed's broadcast Asian
programming and some of American series reruns with Chinese subtitles, and FOX
HD Asia feed are available through MOD and some of cable providers. The feed
was renamed **Fox Taiwan** in January 2014 and broadcast both local and
foreign programmes.

While Fox Asia imports a substantial amount of programming seen in its US
counterpart, there are separate rights granted to each version of the channel.
Hence Fox Asia has a different line-up of programmes from its US counterpart,
including those seen on rival networks in the US and produced by competitors
of 20th Century Fox (such as Warner Bros.).[ _citation needed_ ]

