**Geoffrey Neil Leech** FBA (16 January 1936 – 19 August 2014) was a
specialist in English language and linguistics. He was the author, co-author
or editor of over 30 books and over 120 published papers.[1] His main academic
interests were English grammar, corpus linguistics, stylistics, pragmatics and
semantics.

Leech was born in Gloucester, England on 16 January 1936. He was educated at
Tewkesbury Grammar School, Gloucestershire, and at University College London
(UCL), where he was awarded a BA (1959) and PhD (1968). He began his teaching
career at UCL, where he was influenced by Randolph Quirk and Michael Halliday
as senior colleagues. He spent 1964-5 as a Harkness Fellow at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge MA. In 1969 Leech moved to
Lancaster University, UK, where he was Professor of English Linguistics from
1974 to 2001. In 2002 he became Emeritus Professor in the Department of
Linguistics and English Language,[2] Lancaster University. He was a Fellow of
the British Academy, an Honorary Fellow of UCL and of Lancaster University, a
Member of the Academia Europaea and the Norwegian Academy of Science and
Letters, and an honorary doctor of three universities, most recently of
Charles University, Prague (2012). He died in Lancaster, England on 19 August
2014.[3]

Leech's most important research contributions are the following:

Leech contributed to three team projects resulting in large-scale descriptive
reference grammars of English, all published as lengthy single-volume works:
_A Grammar of Contemporary English_ (with Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum and
Jan Svartvik, 1972); _A Comprehensive Grammar of the English Language_ (with
Randolph Quirk, Sidney Greenbaum and Jan Svartvik, 1985); and the _Longman
Grammar of Spoken and Written English_ (LGSWE) (with Douglas Biber, Stig
Johansson, Susan Conrad and Edward Finegan, 1999). These grammars have been
broadly regarded as providing an authoritative "standard" account of English
grammar, although the rather traditional framework employed has also been
criticised — e.g. by Huddleston and Pullum (2002) in their _Cambridge Grammar
of the English Language_.

Inspired by the corpus-building work of Randolph Quirk at UCL,[4] soon after
his arrival at Lancaster, Leech pioneered computer corpus development.[5] He
initiated the first electronic corpus of British English, completed in 1978 as
the [Lancaster-Oslo-Bergen Corpus|Lancaster-Oslo/Bergen] (LOB) Corpus.[6]
Later, in the 1990s, he took a leading role in the compilation of the British
National Corpus (BNC). The Lancaster research group that he co-founded
(UCREL[7]) also developed programs for the annotation of corpora: especially
corpus taggers and parsers.[8] The term _treebank_ , now generally applied to
a parsed corpus, was coined by Leech in the 1980s.[9] The _LGSWE_ grammar
(1999) was systematically based on corpus analysis. Leech's more recent corpus
research has centred on grammatical change in recent and contemporary
English.[10]

Leech has written extensively on the stylistics of literary texts. The two
stylistic works for which he is best known are _A Linguistic Guide to English
Poetry_ (1969)[11] and _Style in Fiction_ (1981; 2nd edn. 2007),[12] co-
authored with Mick Short. The latter book won the PALA25 Silver Jubilee Prize
for "the most influential book in stylistics" since 1980.[13] The approach
Leech has taken to literary style relies heavily on the concept of
foregrounding,[14] a term derived from P. L. Garvin's translation of the Czech
term _aktualisace_ , referring to the psychological prominence (against the
background of ordinary language) of artistic effects in literature.[15] In
Leech's account, foregrounding in poetry is based on deviation from linguistic
norms, which may take the form of unexpected irregularity (as in Dylan
Thomas's _A grief ago_ ) as well as unexpected regularity (or parallelism – as
in _I kissed thee ere I killed thee_ from _Othello_ ). Further, Leech has
distinguished three levels of deviation:[16]

Leech's interest in semantics was strong in the period up to 1980, when it
gave way to his interest in pragmatics. His PhD thesis at London University
was on the semantics of place, time and modality in English, and was
subsequently published under the title _Towards a Semantic Description of
English_ (1969). At a more popular level, he published _Semantics_ (1974,
1981),[18] in which the seven types of meaning discussed in Chapter 2 have
been widely cited: conceptual meaning, connotative meaning, social meaning,
affective meaning, reflected meaning, collocative meaning, thematic meaning.

In the 1970s and 1980s Leech took a part in the development of pragmatics as a
newly emerging subdiscipline of linguistics deeply influenced by the ordinary-
language philosophers J. L. Austin, J. R. Searle and H. P. Grice. In his main
book on the subject, _Principles of Pragmatics_ (1983),[19] he argued for a
general account of pragmatics based on regulative principles following the
model of Grice's (1975) Cooperative principle (CP), with its constitutive
maxims of Quantity, Quality, Relation and Manner. The part of the book that
has had most influence is that dealing with the Principle of Politeness, seen
as a principle having constituent maxims like Grice's CP. The politeness
maxims Leech distinguished are: the Tact Maxim, Generosity Maxim, Approbation
Maxim, Modesty Maxim, Agreement Maxim and Sympathy Maxim. This Gricean
treatment of politeness has been much criticised: for example, it has been
criticised for being "expansionist" (adding new maxims to the Gricean model)
rather than "reductionist" (reducing Grice's four maxims to a smaller number,
as in Relevance theory, where the Maxim of Relation, or principle of
relevance, is the only one that survives).[20][21] Leech is also criticised
for allowing the addition of new maxims to be unconstrained (in defiance of
Occam's Razor), and for his postulation of an "absolute politeness" which does
not vary according to situation, whereas most politeness theorists maintain
that politeness cannot be identified out of context. In his article
"Politeness: Is there an East-West divide?" (2007),[22][23] Leech addresses
these criticisms and presents a revision of his politeness model.

