Students of George Mason University, as part of Professor T. Mills Kelly's
course – "Lying about the past", have created two popular hoaxes: the "Edward
Owens hoax," and the "Reddit serial killer hoax." It is a goal of the course
to create a sweeping internet deception. As Prof. Kelly stated in the course's
syllabus:

The Edward Owens hoax was a historical hoax created by students at George
Mason University in 2008 as a class project for "Lying About the Past". The
students created a website and a fictitious entry on English Wikipedia about
Edward Owens, purportedly a Virginia oyster fisherman born in 1853 who became
a pirate. The hoax was reported as true in some media outlets.[1]

Students published a blog and videos about the fictional Owens, created by the
fictional student "Jane Browning". The blog asserted that Owens fell on hard
times during the Long Depression of the 1870s and took up piracy in Chesapeake
Bay to survive. The students wrote that he robbed smaller commercial vessels
and wealthy pleasure boaters from Maryland using a punt gun to threaten his
victims. The class created a fake will, which asserted that Owens and his crew
eventually went back to oyster fishing.[2][3][4] The students later created a
hoax biography of Owens on Wikipedia.[2]

After some media outlets and academics reported the hoax as factual, the class
divulged the hoax.[5][6]

The Reddit serial killer hoax was a second historical hoax perpetrated by
"Lying about the past" class members. This one quickly failed, unlike the
Owens hoax. In 2012, Professor Kelly taught the course for a second time in a
similar format. The Reddit hoax, about an alleged serial killer named Joseph
Scafe, was launched on the Reddit site on 28 April, and was first debunked in
just over an hour.[1][7]

The participating students created a sockpuppet named Lisa Quinn, and under
her name opened a Wordpress.com blog entitled: "I think my uncle was a serial
killer."[8] In her blog, Lisa wrote that she found some odd items in a
Saratoga steamer trunk that she received upon the death of her grandparents.
Lisa posted pictures of the trunk; ladies shoes she presumably found inside
the trunk; and newspaper clippings from 1895; one of which was about the
murder of Alice Walsh—later identified as having been taken from the April 22,
1895 edition of _The Evening World_.[9] According to Lisa's post, the trunk
belonged to a relative, Joseph Scafe, (also called 'Uncle Joe'), and that it
contained—in a false panel—ladies' jewelry and a "disturbing" journal. Lisa
supposedly wanted to know if—in the opinion of her readers—her uncle was a
serial killer.

With a new sockpuppet, DisturbedThrowaway, the students attempted to start the
spread of the hoax with a posting of a question on AskReddit: "Do you think my
uncle Joe was just weird or possibly a serial killer?"[7] Through Reddit, the
hoax was expected to spread. At first, the hoax aroused interest. Many posters
requested more photos (which DisturbedThrowaway declined) and alluded to the
commercial success the case could lead to. The name of Jack the Ripper was
mentioned as well. Yet, within 26 minutes, suspicions were rising.
DisturbedThrowaway, the poster of the question, claimed to have found the
names of two victims, Alice Walsh and Diamond Flossie, in the documents she
retrieved. She asked the redditors for assistance in research; however, a
quick Wikipedia search brought forth information connected with the two names,
and posters at the site wondered why DisturbedThrowaway hadn't performed such
a simple search herself.

Just over an hour after the initial posting, HatesRedditors suggested that the
post was viral marketing.[7] He noted that the Wikipedia entries for the
victims had been created within two weeks of the posting and the pictures in
the articles looked faked. The students tried to keep the deception going for
several weeks, but the story was exposed. On May 14, Kelly revealed the serial
killer hoax on his blog.[10]

With the latest hoax exposed, Wikipedia deleted the two entries about Alice
Walsh and Diamond Flossie which had been written by the students’ sockpuppets.
The professor and students claimed that the subjects were factual, but
Wikipedia found them to be of insufficient notability. Wikipedia
administrators did raise questions about the course's situational ethics,
however, as some claimed that Professor Kelly legitimized Wikipedia
vandalism.[11][ _circular reference_ ]

Professor Kelly did not express regret in this matter, "I don't think there
were any real victims here", he blogged:

Yoni Appelbaum wrote in _The Atlantic_ an article, "How the Professor Who
fooled Wikipedia Got Caught by Reddit," in which he compared the serial killer
hoax and the last pirate hoax. In his article, he wondered why the 2008 hoax
was successful, while this hoax failed in minutes. One answer he suggested was
that Wikipedia has a trusting community, while Reddit has a critical and
skeptical community.[1]

In March 2013, Kelly announced that he would no longer be teaching the course,
after the university declined to make it part of the regular curriculum of his
department,[13] however, as of February 2015 Professor Mills continues to
delve into topics dealing with editing and/or manipulating Wikipedia in his
digital history class[14] at George Mason University.[15] As of February 2016,
all references to the hoaxes and classes have been removed from the
university's web pages.

