**George Burns** (born **Nathan Birnbaum** ; Yiddish: נתן בירנבוים‎; January
20, 1896 – March 9, 1996) was an American comedian, actor, singer, and writer.
He was one of the few entertainers whose career successfully spanned
vaudeville, radio, film and television. His arched eyebrow and cigar-smoke
punctuation became familiar trademarks for over three quarters of a century.
He and his wife, Gracie Allen, appeared on radio, television, and film as the
comedy duo Burns and Allen.

At age 79, Burns had a sudden career revival as an amiable, beloved and
unusually active comedy elder statesman in the 1975 film _The Sunshine Boys_ ,
for which he won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. Burns, who
became a centenarian in 1996, continued to work until just weeks before his
death of cardiac arrest at his home in Beverly Hills.

George Burns was born Nathan Birnbaum on January 20, 1896 in New York City,[2]
the ninth of 12 children born to Hadassah "Dorah" (née Bluth; 1857–1927) and
Eliezer Birnbaum (1855–1903), known as Louis or Lippe, Jewish immigrants who
had come to the United States from Kolbuszowa, Galicia, now Poland.[3] Burns
was a member of the First Roumanian-American Congregation.[4]

His father was a substitute cantor at the local synagogue but usually worked
as a coat presser. During the influenza epidemic of 1903, Lippe Birnbaum
contracted the flu and died at the age of 47. Nattie (as George was then
called) went to work to help support the family, shining shoes, running
errands and selling newspapers.[5]

When he landed a job as a syrup maker in a local candy shop at age seven,
"Nate" as he was known, was "discovered", as he recalled long after:[6]

We were all about the same age, six and seven, and when we were bored making
syrup, we used to practice singing harmony in the basement. One day our letter
carrier came down to the basement. His name was Lou Farley. Feingold was his
real name, but he changed it to Farley. He wanted the whole world to sing
harmony. He came down to the basement once to deliver a letter and heard the
four of us kids singing harmony. He liked our style, so we sang a couple more
songs for him. Then we looked up at the head of the stairs and saw three or
four people listening to us and smiling. In fact, they threw down a couple of
pennies. So I said to the kids I was working with: no more chocolate syrup.
It's show business from now on.  
  
We called ourselves the Pee-Wee Quartet. We started out singing on ferryboats,
in saloons, in brothels, and on street corners. We'd put our hats down for
donations. Sometimes the customers threw something in the hats. Sometimes they
took something out of the hats. Sometimes they took the hats.

Burns started smoking cigars when he was 14.[7]

Burns was drafted into the United States Army when the U.S. entered World War
I in 1917, but he failed the physical because he was extremely nearsighted.[
_citation needed_ ] In order to try to hide his Jewish heritage, he adopted
the stage name by which he would be known for the rest of his life. He claimed
in a few interviews that the idea of the name originated from the fact that
two star major league players (George H. Burns and George J. Burns, unrelated)
were playing major league baseball at the time. Both men achieved over 2,000
major league hits and hold some major league records. Burns also was reported
to have taken the name "George" from his brother Izzy (who hated his own name
so he changed it to "George"), and the Burns from the Burns Brothers Coal
Company (he used to steal coal from their truck).[8][9]:33

He normally partnered with a girl, sometimes in an adagio dance routine,
sometimes comic patter. Though he had an apparent flair for comedy, he never
quite clicked with any of his partners, until he met a young Irish Catholic
lady in 1923. "And all of a sudden," he said famously in later years, "the
audience realized I had a talent. They were right. I did have a talent—and I
was married to her for 38 years."[10]

His first wife was Hannah Siegel (stage name: Hermosa Jose), one of his dance
partners. The marriage, never consummated, lasted 26 weeks and happened
because her family would not let them go on tour unless they were married.
They divorced at the end of the tour.[9]:58

Burns' second wife and famous partner in their entertainment routines was
Gracie Allen.[7]

Burns and Allen got a start in motion pictures with a series of comic short
films in the late 1920s and early 1930s. Their feature credits in the mid- to
late-1930s included _The Big Broadcast_ ; _International House_ (1933), _Six
of a Kind_ (1934), (the latter two films with W.C. Fields), _The Big Broadcast
of 1936_ , _The Big Broadcast of 1937_ , _A Damsel in Distress_ (1937) in
which they danced step-for-step with Fred Astaire, and _College Swing_ (1938)
in which Bob Hope made one of his early film appearances. _Honolulu_ would be
Burns's last movie for nearly 40 years.

Burns and Allen were indirectly responsible for the Bob Hope and Bing Crosby
series of "Road" pictures. In 1938, William LeBaron, producer and managing
director at Paramount, had a script prepared by Don Hartman and Frank Butler.
It was to star Burns and Allen with Bing Crosby, who was then already an
established star of radio, recordings and the movies. The story did not seem
to fit the comedy team's style, so LeBaron ordered Hartman and Butler to
rewrite the script to fit two male co-stars: Hope and Crosby. The script was
titled _Road to Singapore_ , and it made motion picture history when it was
released in 1940.

Burns and Allen first made it to radio as the comedy relief for bandleader Guy
Lombardo, which did not always sit well with Lombardo's home audience. In his
later memoir, _The Third Time Around_ , Burns revealed a college fraternity's
protest letter, complaining that they resented their weekly dance parties with
their girl friends listening to "Thirty Minutes of the Sweetest Music This
Side of Heaven" had to be broken into by the droll vaudeville team.

In time, though, Burns and Allen found their own show and radio audience,
first airing on February 15, 1932 and concentrating on their classic stage
routines plus sketch comedy in which the Burns and Allen style was woven into
different little scenes, not unlike the short films they made in Hollywood.
They were also good for a clever publicity stunt, none more so than the hunt
for Gracie's missing brother, a hunt that included Gracie turning up on other
radio shows searching for him as well.

The couple was portrayed at first as younger singles, with Allen the object of
both Burns' and other cast members' affections. Most notably, bandleaders Ray
Noble (known for his phrase, "Gracie, this is the first time we've ever been
alone") and Artie Shaw played "love" interests to Gracie. In addition, singer
Tony Martin played an unwilling love interest of Gracie's, in which Gracie
"sexually harassed" him, by threatening to fire him if the romantic interest
was not reciprocated.

In time, however, due to slipping ratings and the difficulty of being
portrayed as singles in light of the audience's close familiarity with their
real-life marriage, the show adapted in the fall of 1941 to present them as
the married couple they actually were. For a time, Burns and Allen had a
rather distinguished and popular musical director: Artie Shaw, who also
appeared as a character in some of the show's sketches. A somewhat different
Gracie also marked this era, as the Gracie character could often be found to
be mean to George.

**George** : Your mother cut my face out of the picture.  
**Gracie** : Oh, George, you're being sensitive.  
**George** : I am not! Look at my face! What happened to it?  
**Gracie** : I don't know. It looks like you fell on it.

Or

**Census Taker** : What do you make?  
**Gracie** : I make cookies and aprons and knit sweaters.  
**Census Taker** : No, I mean what do you earn?  
**Gracie** : George's salary.

As this format grew stale over the years, Burns and his fellow writers
redeveloped the show as a situation comedy in the fall of 1941. The reformat
focused on the couple's married life and life among various friends, including
Elvia Allman as "Tootsie Sagwell," a man-hungry spinster in love with Bill
Goodwin, and neighbors, until the characters of Harry and Blanche Morton
entered the picture to stay.

Like _The Jack Benny Program_ , the new _George Burns & Gracie Allen Show_
portrayed George and Gracie as entertainers with their own weekly radio show.
Goodwin remained, his character as "girl-crazy" as ever, and the music was now
handled by Meredith Willson (later to be better known for composing the
Broadway musical _The Music Man_ ). Willson also played himself on the show as
a naive, friendly, girl-shy fellow. The new format's success made it one of
the few classic radio comedies to completely re-invent itself and regain major
fame.

The supporting cast during this phase included Mel Blanc as the melancholy,
ironically named "Happy Postman" (his catchphrase was "Remember, keep
smiling!"); Bea Benaderet (later Cousin Pearl in _The Beverly Hillbillies_ ,
Kate Bradley in _Petticoat Junction_ and the voice of Betty Rubble in _The
Flintstones_ ) and Hal March (later more famous as the host of _The $64,000
Question_ ) as neighbors Blanche and Harry Morton; and the various members of
Gracie's ladies' club, the Beverly Hills Uplift Society. One running gag
during this period, stretching into the television era, was Burns'
questionable singing voice, as Gracie lovingly referred to her husband as
"Sugar Throat." The show received and maintained a Top 10 rating for the rest
of its radio life.

In the fall of 1949, after twelve years at NBC, the couple took the show back
to its original network CBS, where they had risen to fame from 1932 to 1937.
Their good friend Jack Benny reached a negotiating impasse with NBC over the
corporation he set up ("Amusement Enterprises") to package his show, the
better to put more of his earnings on a capital-gains basis and avoid the 80
percent taxes slapped on very high earners in the World War II period. When
CBS executive William S. Paley convinced Benny to move to CBS (Paley, among
other things, impressed Benny with his attitude that the performers make the
network, not the other way around as NBC chief David Sarnoff reputedly
believed), Benny in turn convinced several NBC stars to join him, including
Burns and Allen. Thus did CBS reap the benefits when Burns and Allen moved to
television in 1950.

On television, _The George Burns and Gracie Allen Show_ put faces to the radio
characters audiences had come to love. A number of significant changes were
seen in the show:

Burns and Allen also took a cue from Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz's Desilu
Productions and formed a company of their own, McCadden Corporation (named
after the street on which Burns' brother lived), headquartered on the General
Service Studio lot in the heart of Hollywood, and set up to film television
shows and commercials. Besides their own hit show (which made the transition
from a bi-weekly live series to a weekly filmed version in the fall of 1952),
the couple's company produced such television series as _The Bob Cummings
Show_ (subsequently syndicated and rerun as _Love That Bob_ ); _The People's
Choice_ , starring Jackie Cooper; _Mona McCluskey_ , starring Juliet Prowse;
and _Mister Ed_ , starring Alan Young and a talented "talking" horse. Several
of their good friend Jack Benny's 1953–55 filmed episodes were also produced
by McCadden for CBS.

_The George Burns and Gracie Allen Show_ ran on CBS Television from 1950 to
1958, when Burns at last consented to Allen's retirement. The onset of heart
trouble in the early 1950s had left her exhausted from full-time work and she
had been anxious to stop but could not say no to Burns.

Burns attempted to continue the show (for new sponsor Colgate-Palmolive on
NBC), but without Allen to provide the classic Gracie-isms, the show expired
after a year.

Burns subsequently created _Wendy and Me_ , a sitcom in which he co-starred
with Connie Stevens, Ron Harper, and J. Pat O'Malley. He acted primarily as
the narrator, and secondarily as the adviser to Stevens' Gracie-like
character. The first episode involved the nearly 70-year-old Burns watching
his younger neighbor's activities with amusement, just as he would watch the
Burns and Allen television show while it was unfolding to get a jump on what
Gracie was up to in its final two seasons. Again as in the Burns and Allen
television show, George frequently broke the fourth wall by commenting
directly to viewers. The series only lasted a year. In a promotion, Burns had
joked that "Connie Stevens plays Wendy, and I play 'me'."

After Gracie's death George immersed himself in work. McCadden Productions co-
produced the television series _No Time for Sergeants_ , based on the hit
Broadway play; George also produced Juliet Prowse's 1965–66 NBC situation
comedy, _Mona McCluskey_. At the same time, he toured the U.S. playing
nightclub and theater engagements with such diverse partners as Carol
Channing, Dorothy Provine, Jane Russell, Connie Haines, and Berle Davis. He
also performed a series of solo concerts, playing university campuses, New
York's Philharmonic Hall and winding up a successful season at Carnegie Hall,
where he wowed a capacity audience with his show-stopping songs, dances, and
jokes.

In 1974, Jack Benny signed to play one of the lead roles in the Metro-Goldwyn-
Mayer film version of Neil Simon's _The Sunshine Boys_ (Red Skelton was
originally the other, but he objected to some of the script's language).
Benny's health had begun to fail, however, and he advised his manager Irving
Fein to let longtime friend Burns fill in for him on a series of nightclub
dates to which Benny had committed around the U.S.

Burns, who enjoyed working, accepted the job for what would be his first
feature film since before World War II. As he recalled years later:[6]

Ill health had prevented Benny from working on _The Sunshine Boys_ ; he died
of pancreatic cancer on December 26, 1974. Burns, heartbroken, said that the
only time he ever wept in his life other than Gracie's death was when Benny
died. He was chosen to give one of the eulogies at the funeral and said, "Jack
was someone special to all of you, but he was so special to me...I cannot
imagine my life without Jack Benny, and I will miss him so very much."[11]
Burns then broke down and had to be helped to his seat. People who knew George
said that he never could really come to terms with his beloved friend's death.

Burns replaced Benny in the film as well as the club tour, a move that turned
out to be one of the biggest breaks of his career; his wise performance as
faded vaudevillian Al Lewis won him the 1975 Academy Award for Best Supporting
Actor, and permanently secured his career resurgence. At the age of 80, Burns
was the oldest Oscar winner in the history of the Academy Awards, a record
that would remain until Jessica Tandy won an Oscar for _Driving Miss Daisy_ in
1989.

In 1977, Burns made another hit film, _Oh, God!_ , playing the omnipotent
title role opposite singer John Denver as an earnest but befuddled supermarket
manager, whom God picks at random to revive his message. The image of Burns in
a sailor's cap and light springtime jacket as the droll Almighty influenced
his subsequent comedic work, as well as that of other comedians. At a
celebrity roast in his honor, Dean Martin adapted a Burns crack: "When George
was growing up, the Top Ten were the Ten Commandments".

Burns appeared in this character along with Vanessa Williams on the September
1984 cover of _Penthouse_ magazine, the issue which contained the notorious
nude photos of Williams, as well as the first appearance of underage
pornographic film star Traci Lords. A blurb on the cover even announced "Oh
God, she's nude!".

_Oh, God!_ inspired two sequels _Oh, God! Book II_ (in which the Almighty
engages a precocious schoolgirl played by Louanne Sirota to spread the word)
and _Oh, God! You Devil_ —in which Burns played a dual role as God and the
Devil, with the soul of a would-be songwriter played by Ted Wass at stake.

After guest starring on _The Muppet Show_ and _Alice_ ,[12] Burns appeared in
1978's _Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band_ , the film based on the
Beatles' album of the same name. In 1979, at the age of 83, Burns starred in
two feature films, _Just You and Me, Kid_ and _Going in Style_. Burns remained
active in movies and TV past his 90th birthday. One of his last films was
1988's _18 Again!_ , based on his half-novelty, country music-based hit
single, "I Wish I Was 18 Again". In this film, Burns played an 81-year-old
self-made millionaire industrialist who switched bodies with his awkward,
artistic, 18-year-old grandson (played by Charlie Schlatter).

Burns also did regular nightclub stand-up acts in his later years, usually
portraying himself as a lecherous old man. He always smoked a cigar onstage
and reputedly timed his monologues by the amount the cigar had burned down.
For this reason, he preferred cheap El Producto cigars as the loosely wrapped
tobacco burned longer. Burns once quipped "In my youth, they called me a
rebel. When I was middle aged, they called me eccentric. Now that I'm old, I'm
doing the same thing I've always done and they're calling me senile."[
_citation needed_ ]

Arthur Marx estimated that Burns smoked around 300,000 cigars during his
lifetime, starting at the age of 14. In his final years, he smoked no more
than four a day and he never used cigarettes or marijuana, claiming "Look, I
can't get any more kicks than I'm getting. What can marijuana do for me that
show business hasn't done?" His last feature film role was the cameo role of
Milt Lackey, a 100-year-old stand-up comedian, in the 1994 comedy mystery
_Radioland Murders_.

When Burns turned 90 in 1986, the city of Los Angeles renamed the northern end
of Hamel Road "George Burns Road."[13] City regulations prohibited naming a
city street after a living person, but an exception was made for Burns.[
_citation needed_ ] In celebration of Burns's 99th birthday in January 1995,
Los Angeles renamed the eastern end of Alden Drive "Gracie Allen Drive." Burns
was present at the unveiling ceremony (one of his last public appearances)
where he quipped, "It's good to be here at the corner of Burns & Allen. At my
age, it's good to be anywhere!"[13] George Burns Road and Gracie Allen Drive
cross just a few blocks west of the Beverly Center mall in the heart of the
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.

Burns remained in good health for most of his life, in part thanks to a daily
exercise regimen of swimming, walks, sit-ups, and push-ups. He bought new
Cadillacs every year and drove until the age of 93. After that, Burns had
chauffeurs drive him around. In his later years, he also had difficulty
reading fine print.

Burns suffered a head injury after falling in his bathtub in July 1994 and
underwent surgery to remove fluid in his skull. Burns never fully recovered
and all performances celebrating his 100th birthday were canceled. In December
1995, a month before his 100th birthday, Burns was well enough to attend a
Christmas party hosted by Frank Sinatra (who turned 80 that month), where he
reportedly caught the flu, which weakened him further. When Burns was 96, he
had signed a lifetime contract with Caesar's Palace in Las Vegas to perform
stand-up comedy there, which included the guarantee of a show on his
centenary, January 20, 1996. When that day actually came, however, he was too
weak to deliver the planned performance. He released a statement joking how he
would love for his 100th birthday to have "a night with Sharon Stone".

On March 9, 1996, 49 days after his centenary, Burns died in his Beverly Hills
home.[14] His funeral was held three days later at the Wee Kirk o' the Heather
church in Forest Lawn Memorial Park Cemetery, Glendale.[14] As much as he
looked forward to reaching the age of 100, Burns also stated, about a year
before he died, that he also looked forward to death, saying that on the day
he would die, he would be with Gracie again in Heaven. Upon being interred
with Gracie, the crypt's marker was changed from, "Grace Allen Burns-Beloved
Wife And Mother (1902–1964)" to "Gracie Allen (1902–1964) & George Burns
(1896–1996)-Together Again". George had said that he wanted Gracie to have top
billing.

George Burns has three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame: a motion pictures
star at 1639 Vine Street, a television star at 6510 Hollywood Boulevard, and a
live performance star at 6672 Hollywood Boulevard. The first two stars were
placed during the initial installations of 1960, while the third star ceremony
was held in 1984,[15][16] in the new category of live performance, or live
theatre, established that year.[17] Burns is also a member of the Television
Hall of Fame, where he and Gracie Allen were both inducted in 1988.

He is the subject of Rupert Holmes' one-actor play _Say Goodnight Gracie_.

Burns was a bestselling author who wrote a total of 10 books:

