**Jorge Antonio Bell Mathey** (born October 21, 1959), better known as
**George Bell** , is a Dominican former left fielder and American League MVP
in Major League Baseball who played 12 seasons for the Toronto Blue Jays
(1981, 1983–1990), Chicago Cubs (1991) and Chicago White Sox (1992–1993). Bell
batted and threw right-handed.

Originally signed by the Philadelphia Phillies in 1978, Bell was selected by
the Toronto Blue Jays in the 1980 Rule 5 draft.[1] Bell was discovered in the
Dominican Republic by Blue Jays scout Epy Guerrero. His first season as a
regular was in 1984, when he teamed with Lloyd Moseby and Jesse Barfield to
form a successful outfield for the Blue Jays. That outfield, along with solid
starting pitching, led the Blue Jays to their first-ever American League East
division title in 1985. Bell caught a fly ball, off the bat of Ron Hassey, for
the final out in the 5–1 victory over the New York Yankees on October 5,
clinching the division title for the Blue Jays. Despite Bell's .321 average in
the ALCS, they lost the series to the Kansas City Royals.

His best season came in 1987 when the Blue Jays ultimately fell two games
short of the Detroit Tigers in the division race. Bell finished with a .308
BA, .352 OBP, .608 SLG, 111 R, 47 HR and a league-leading 134 RBI. He was
awarded the American League MVP award that year.

On April 4, 1988, Bell became the first player in Major League history to hit
three home runs on an opening day (all of them coming off of Bret
Saberhagen),[2] however, his play throughout the year declined as he
conflicted with Blue Jays manager Jimy Williams, who wanted Bell to become the
Jays' full-time designated hitter.

Bell had a bounce-back year in 1989, posting a .297 average, 18 HR and 104
RBI, helping the Blue Jays win their second division title. However, in the
ALCS, he only hit .200 with one home run, as they lost the series to the
Oakland Athletics. Bell became a free agent after the 1990 season and signed
with the Chicago Cubs. After one year with the Cubs, he was traded across town
to the Chicago White Sox for Sammy Sosa and Ken Patterson.

He played two years with the White Sox, recording 25 HR and 112 RBI in 1992.
In 1993 his play declined, primarily due to a persistent knee injury. He was
benched in the ALCS against his former team, the Blue Jays, and was released
at the end of the season, after which he announced his retirement.

Bell was a powerful free-swinger, usually posting a good slugging percentage
and relatively low strikeout rate, but a poor on-base percentage. He was known
as a mediocre defensive player and played mainly as a designated hitter during
the last two years of his career, despite his strong preference for playing in
the field. Despite his success on the field, Bell had a love-hate relationship
with the fans and media in Toronto, particularly in his later years as his
declining defensive game came to overshadow his offensive talents. After the
fans booed him for committing an error, he told the media that the fans could
"kiss my purple butt." The next day a sign appeared in left field "George, we
are behind you all the way."[ _citation needed_ ] Bell's difficult
relationship with the Toronto sports media was exacerbated by his reluctance
to do interviews during his early years with the Blue Jays (which was due to
his then-weak knowledge with the English language). Towards the end of his
time in Toronto, however, Bell warmed to the media, who in turn began to
soften their often harsh criticisms of his play and attitude.

On May 28, 1989, while with the Blue Jays, Bell hit a walk-off home run in a
7–5 victory over the Chicago White Sox in the final Major League game played
at Exhibition Stadium. Bell also homered in the first game at the Blue Jays'
new park, SkyDome (now the Rogers Centre), on June 5, eight days later.

George Bell is currently enshrined in the upper deck of the Rogers Centre's
Level of Excellence, devoted to players and personnel who have made a
significant impact as members of the Toronto Blue Jays. He shares the honor
with Tony Fernández, Joe Carter, Cito Gaston, Pat Gillick, Dave Stieb, Tom
Cheek, Roberto Alomar, Carlos Delgado, Paul Beeston, and Roy Halladay.

In 2004, he was inducted into the Caribbean Baseball Hall of Fame. In 2013, he
was inducted into the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame and Ontario Sports Hall
of Fame.[3]

In 1587 games over 12 seasons, Bell posted a .278 batting average
(1702-for-6123) with 814 runs, 308 doubles, 34 triples, 265 home runs, 1002
RBI, 331 base on balls, .316 on-base percentage and .469 slugging percentage.
He recorded a .964 fielding percentage. In the 1985 and '89 ALCS, he hit .271
(13-for-48) with 6 runs, 1 home run and 3 RBI.

He was the older brother of late major leaguer Juan Bell.

