**GolfNow** is an online booking service for tee times at golf courses.
Originally established in 2001 by Cypress Golf Solutions in Scottsdale,
Arizona, it was acquired by Comcast via its Golf Channel unit in March 2008.
Since Comcast's purchase of NBC Universal, the website now operates as part of
the NBC Sports Digital unit.

The GolfNow.com domain name was initially used by Chris Ryan and Dr. Tom
Giannulli, in Houston, Texas 1999, with the intent to build the first online
golf reservation system. Under Mr. Ryan's leadership, the company went on to
develop and operate the initial Golfnow.com website
(https://web.archive.org/web/20000511133802/http://www.golfnow.com/) til 2001.
Funding issues and sluggish adoption of their reservation platform in the era
of dial up modems, forced the company to pivot to a more content driven
transaction model. Cypress Golf Solutions, which was founded in Scottsdale,
Arizona by Brett Darrow and Frank Halpin in 2001, purchased the GolfNow.com
domain name.[2][3] The company expanded its GolfNow brand and operations to a
larger regional area over the years, and by 2006 it was operating in 17 states
at over 600 golf courses.[3][4]

In March 2008, Comcast, owner of Golf Channel, purchased GolfNow. The
company's operations were re-located to Golf Channel's Orlando, Florida
headquarters.[5][6] That same year, the company facilitated the booking of 2.4
million rounds.[3]

GolfNow extended its services outside the United States for the first time in
2011 to Ireland through GolfNow.ie.[7] In 2013, GolfNow purchased BRS, a
booking service in the United Kingdom, along with Fore! Reservations, one of
the largest tee time companies in the U.S.[8] As of 2011,

GolfNow offered to acquire competitor EZLinks or its assets. GolfNow hired a
former EZLinks employee. In 2012, EZLinks filed a lawsuit over software theft
via the former employee.[9]

In October 2014, GolfNow acquired Active Network's golf division. The
acquisition added 1,100 courses to GolfNow's service.[10] In 2015, GolfNow
facilitated the booking of nearly 15 million rounds.[11]

This is GolfNowâ€™s fourth acquisition in the last 18 months. It acquired BRS
Golf, a British tee-sheet service with 750 courses last summer. It also
acquired FORE! Reservations, an American counterpart with more than 2,000 golf
courses. More recently, it acquired Crescent Systems, which had 300 to 400
clients.[12]

GolfNow offers access to online booking services for over 9,000 golf
courses.[13] Users can compare prices of tee times across multiple courses,
read user reviews, and book their reservation.[13][14]

GolfNow also offers a mobile app; the free version offers the service's core
search and booking functionality, while a subscription-based premium version
adds additional features for use whilst playing, including a scorecard,
personal statistics, and an "on-course GPS" function allowing access to
overhead satellite maps of holes with distance measurements.[15][16]

The _Orlando Sentinel_ reported that GolfNow has had a positive impact on the
business of golf courses in Orlando, noting that the service helped to
encourage business during previously "off-peak" dayparts such as the early
afternoon. The general manager of Orlando's Dubsdread Golf Club felt that
GolfNow had helped customers discover the course among other options in the
region, crediting the service for "getting our name and our prices to those
golfers who normally would not drive past 15, 20 golf courses to come play
golf here."[14] The service was also credited with having attracted existing
golfers to new courses, such as the Four Seasons Resort Orlando's Tranquilo,
and new clientele to existing courses.[14] Orlando was GolfNow's fifth-largest
market in 2015, having generated $14.5 million in revenue from partner
courses.[14] There are articles and reviews to the contrary: The Oaks golf
course in Kentucky posted a rebuttal to GolfNow's claims of helping the sport,
but more directly, the golf courses. The Hot Deals, they claim, are chased by
players only wanting to pay the least no matter what, and none of that money
ever gets to the golf course. They also claim that very few, if any, customers
return unless they again find a HotDeal; which in no way helps with daily
operating expenses. The Oaks has ceased to do business with GolfNow. [17]

