**Goodman Fielder** is a joint Hong Kong/Singapore-owned[1] manufacturer,
marketer and distributor of bread, small goods, dairy products, margarine,
oil, dressings and various food ingredients. Its main operations are in New
Zealand, Australia, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, and New Caledonia, with over 40
manufacturing sites. The company employs over 5,000 people, and has more than
120 brands. In March 2015, Goodmans Fielder was acquired by new conglomerate,
Wilmar International and First Pacific, in a joint-venture to effectively
manage and enhance import/ export logistics internationally.

The company was founded in 1986 after the merger of Allied Mills Ltd and
Goodman Group Ltd. Since the merger in 1986, the company has purchased a
further 13 companies. The company was taken over by Burns Philp in 2003.[2]

Goodman Fielder was relisted on the sharemarket at the end of 2005[3] with
Burns Philip company retaining a 20% share (this share was subsequently sold
in 2007). As part of the IPO, New Zealand Dairy Foods brands Meadowfresh,
Tararua, Kiwi, Huttons, Anchor Cheese (under licence), Top Hat and Puhoi
cheese became part of Goodman Fielder.

The Uncle Tobys and Bluebird snack food businesses of the "original" Goodman
Fielder were not included in the float, the former being sold to Nestle[4] and
the latter to Pepsico.[5]

Chris Delaney was Goodman Fielder's CEO from 4 July 2011, he is the former
Asia Pacific President of Campbell Soup Company. He resigned following a
takeover of the company by Wilmar International and First Pacific in March
2015 for $1.3 billion Australian dollars. [6] [7]

Goodman Fielder's CEO is Scott Weitemeyer.[8]

The company's brands include:

Goodman Fielder operate in the Dairy, Baking and Grocery segments of the food
manufacturing market, and have a portfolio of retail and food service brands,
including Meadow Fresh, Puhoi Valley, Bouton D'or, Tararua, Vogel's, Quality
Bakers, Molenberg, Natures Fresh and Meadowlea.

The company exports many of its products to over 30 countries. Goodman Fielder
has four divisions, Home Ingredients, Baking, Dairy and Commercial Fats &
Oils.

