**Greeklish** , a portmanteau of the words **Greek** and **English** , also
known as **Grenglish** , **Latinoellinika** / **Λατινοελληνικά** or **ASCII
Greek**, is the Greek language written using the Latin alphabet.[1] Unlike
standardized systems of Romanization of Greek, as used internationally for
purposes such as rendering Greek proper names or place names, or for
bibliographic purposes, the term _Greeklish_ mainly refers to informal, ad-hoc
practices of writing Greek text in environments where the use of the Greek
alphabet is technically impossible or cumbersome, especially in electronic
media. Greeklish was commonly used on the Internet when Greek people
communicate by forum, e-mail, IRC, instant messaging and occasionally on SMS,
mainly because older operating systems did not have the ability to write in
Greek, or in a unicode form like UTF-8. Nowadays most Greek language content
appears in the Greek alphabet.

Sometimes, the term _Greeklish_ is also used informally for a non-standard
language variety used by bilingual speakers of English and Greek, i.e. Greek
with heavy macaronic or code-switching admixture of English words, or vice
versa.[1]

Some older traditions of using the Latin alphabet for Greek existed in earlier
centuries. The term **frankolevantinika** properly refers to the use of the
Latin script to write Greek in the cultural ambit of Catholicism. ("Frankos"
is an older Greek term for Roman Catholic.) This usage was routine in the
Venetian-ruled Greece and in Venetian Crete in the early modern era. Indeed,
the autograph manuscripts of several Greek literary works of the Renaissance
are in Latin script (e.g. the comedy _Fortounatos_ by Markos Antonios
Foskolos, 1655). This convention was also known as **frankochiotika** /
**φραγκοχιώτικα** , "Frankish/Catholic Chiot", alluding to the significant
presence of Catholic missionaries based on the island of Chios.

Greeklish may be orthographic or phonetic. In orthographic use, the intent is
to reproduce Greek orthography closely: there is a one-to-one mapping between
Greek and Latin letters, and digraphs are avoided, with occasional use of
punctuation or numerals resembling Greek letters rather than Latin digraphs.
While letters are in the first instance chosen for phonetic similarity, visual
equivalence, and corresponding keyboard keys, are used when phonetically
similar letters are exhausted. Thus, psi (ψ) may be written as **ps, 4** or
**y** ; xi (ξ) as **ks, x** or **3** ; and theta (θ) as **th** or **8**.

In phonetic use, there is no concern to reproduce Greek orthography, and the
Greeklish is a phonetic transcription (usually with English phonetic norms,
sometimes with other languages' like German) of Greek words — although often
there is a mixture of the two. In particular, iotacism is preserved: the
various letters and digraphs now pronounced as /i/ are transcribed as **i** ,
and not differentiated as they are in an orthographic scheme (e.g. **h** ,
**i** , **u** , **ei** , **oi** for η ι υ ει οι). In a phonetic scheme, xi is
usually **x** or **ks** or **3** ; **ks** or **3** is used if **x** has been
chosen, following orthographic norms, for chi (χ). Psi and theta will usually
be the digraphs **ps** and **th**. **3** is often used to represent xi (ξ)
because of the similar shape of the number 3 to the original letter albeit
mirrored.

An example of orthographic Greeklish could be the word _**"plateia"**_ , which
in Greek means _"square"_ and using the Greek alphabet is spelled _"πλατεία"_.
The word _"plateia"_ derives from the exact replacement of each Greek letter
with its Latin respective: π= **p** , λ= **l** , α= **a** , τ= **t** , ε=
**e** , ι= **i** , α= **a**.

An example of phonetic Greeklish could be the same word, _"square"_ , written
like this: _**"platia"**_. The reason the same word is, in this occasion,
written without the letter "e", is the fact that, phonetically, the word
"square" in Greek sounds **exactly** like this: _"plat **i** a"_ (since -"εί"-
is now pronounced /i/, as an instance of iotacism), but not for the phonology
and the historical or learned pronunciation of the Ancient Greek language
(where it was _"plateia_ ").

The most extreme case of orthographic Greeklish, which achieves the greater
optical resemblance to the Greek prototypes, is perhaps the so-called
"byzantine" or "arabesque" or "calligraphic/artistic" Greeklish introduced in
the Hellas mailing list by the mathematician George Baloglou. Main
characteristics of Baloglou's "byzantine" is the distinction of σ and ς (σ=
**c** ς= **s** ), the distinction οf lower and upper letters, such as π= **n**
, Π= **TT** or **5** , θ= **8** , Θ= **0** or **Q** , ψ= **y** , Ψ= **4** ,
and the unusual, but with great resemblance with the Greek prototype,
transliterations σ= **c** , π= **n** ρ= **p** Ρ= **P**.

Since there were many relevant differences both in the written and in the
spoken language -such as in the grammar, orthography and phonology of Greek-
at the time of the Ancient Greek, the Koine, Jewish Koine, Medieval and
Modern, thus the same word across the history may change outstandingly and
therefore have multiple choices of "rendering" (transliteration or
transcription) depending on the time on which the referring text was written
or translated.

Giannis Androutsopoulos (see references) talks about _Exegesis_ , a book in
Greeklish that was published by Oxy Publications in 2000. The Greeklish
transliteration was based on the Greek translation of the original book
written by Astro Teller. A novel about artificial intelligence, it describes a
computer program that has acquired a "mind" of its own. The original book was
written entirely in the form of e-mail messages, something that prompted
Androutsopoulos and his collaborators to publish a version of it in Greeklish.

In the past there was a variety of mutually incompatible systems for
displaying non-ASCII characters (IBM 437, ELOT 928, ISO 8859-7 plus a few
company-specific encodings) and no standard method for typing them on a
computer keyboard. This situation was resolved with the introduction of
Unicode. Before the introduction of Unicode-compatible software (web servers
and clients) many Greek personal or informal web sites were written in
Greeklish. This is no longer the case and most (if not all) of the sites with
Greek content are written in native Greek.

Almost all electronic mail messaging was also using Greeklish, and only
recently, with the introduction of full Unicode compatibility in modern e-mail
client software and gradual replacement of older programs, that usage of Greek
characters became widespread.

Some Internet Service Providers in Greece use both Greek and Greeklish in
their emails. For example, the corporate announcements sent to users via email
are usually written in English, Greek, and Greeklish. This is done to ensure
that the recipient can understand an important service message even if the
settings of their computer for non-ASCII characters don't match those of the
sender.

As of 2008, business advertisements using Greeklish have appeared in Attiko
Metro and other areas. Companies that have used Greeklish in some of their
advertisements include Pizza Hut, Forthnet and Vodafone.[ _citation needed_ ]

Use of Greeklish for business purposes or business communication is considered
as a lack of business ability or respect.[ _citation needed_ ]

Around 2004, after most computer software became compatible with Unicode UTF-8
or UTF-16 systems, use of Greeklish was strongly discouraged in many Greek
online Web discussion boards (forums) where Greeklish was in use before.
Administrators threatened to ban users who continued to use Greeklish, thus
making the use of Greek mandatory; but using Greeklish failed to become a
serious reason to get banned. Examples include the Translatum Greek
Translation Forum, the Athens Wireless Metropolitan Network Forum, the Venus
Project Forum, the adslgr.com Forum, the e-steki.gr forum, the Greek
Technological Forum and the e-foititis.gr Greek student forum. The reason for
this is the fact that text written in Greeklish is considerably less
aesthetically pleasing, and also much harder to read, compared to text written
in the Greek alphabet. A non-Greek speaker/reader can guess this by this
example: "δις ιζ χαρντ του ριντ" would be the way to write "this is hard to
read" in English but utilizing the Greek alphabet.

A counterargument used by forum users is that a fair number of users live
abroad and access the Internet from computers they don't own (university,
internet cafes, etc.). There, they are not able to install additional keyboard
layouts so they don't have the ability to type in Greek, therefore Greeklish
is the only option available to them.

On Greek IRC channels and IM applications, most of the time only Greeklish is
used because it is simpler to type and typing errors are more easily excused.
However, Greeklish has been criticised because the user's text bypasses
spellcheck, resulting in lowering their ability to write native Greek
correctly.

On the Facebook social networking web site there are various groups against
the use of "Greeklish".

Wide use for Greeklish in long texts as of 2010, is unusual.

Another current trend in Greeklish is the introduction of Leet phrasing and
vocabulary. Many Leet words or slang have been internalized within the Greek
spoken language through Greek gamers online in games such as World of
Warcraft.[ _citation needed_ ]

Examples:

Since the appearance of Greeklish there have been numerous attempts to develop
applications for automatic conversion from Greeklish to Greek. Most of them
can cope with only some of Greeklish transliteration patterns and can be found
and downloaded from the Internet. The first complete system for automatic
transcription of Greeklish into Greek, obtaining correct spelling is _All
Greek to Me!_ , developed and provided by Institute for Language and Speech
Processing.

The first open online application for the transcription of Greeklish to Greek,
was developed by Artificial Intelligence Group at University of Patras, named
deGREEKLISH.

An open source Greeklish converter, written in the C# programming language, is
available as a stand alone program.

