**Gyaru-moji** (ギャル文字, "gal's alphabet") or **Heta-moji** (下手文字, "poor
handwriting") is a style of obfuscated (cant) Japanese writing popular amongst
urban Japanese youth. As the name gyaru-moji suggests ("gyaru" indicating
"girl"), this writing system was created by and remains primarily employed by
young women.[1]

Like the English phenomenon of SMS language, it is most often used for sending
cell phone text messages, but while text is used as a form of informal
shorthand, a message typed in gyaru-moji usually requires more characters and
effort than the same message typed in plain Japanese. Since writing in gyaru-
moji requires extra effort, and due to the perception of confidentiality,
sending gyaru-moji messages to a peer is seen as a sign of informality or
friendship. The origin of this style is unclear but it has been proposed that
magazines targeted at teenage girls first made it popular, and the phenomenon
started to gain wider attention in media around 2002.[1]

The style has been met with increasing criticism, as its use continues to
expand.[ _citation needed_ ] Reported instances of girls using the writing in
school work, OLs (Office Ladies) adopting the style in the workplace, and
gyaru-moji being used in karaoke subtitling, are examples of this.[ _citation
needed_ ] Anthropologist Laura Miller has analyzed gyaru moji as an example of
gender resistance.[1]

Several online guides for gyaru-moji exist, as well as one published book:
Shibuya Heta Moji Fukyû Iinkai, ed., 2004.[2]

Like leet, gyaru-moji replaces characters with visually similar characters or
combinations of characters. The Japanese language consists of traditional
characters of Chinese origin, kanji, and two native syllabic scripts called
kana: hiragana and katakana. These characters and scripts are altered to form
hidden messages. Hiragana consisting of connected strokes are replaced by
symbols or Greek letters: for example, す ( _su_ ) may be rendered as the
section symbol `§`. Hiragana consisting of detached elements are replaced by
sequences of kana, Western letters, or symbols. For example, ほ ( _ho_ ) may be
typed as `|ま` (vertical bar and hiragana _ma_ ) or `(ま` (open parenthesis and
_ma_ ), け ( _ke_ ) may be typed as `レナ` (katakana _re na_ ), `Iナ` (capital i,
_na_ ), or `(†` (open parenthesis, dagger), and た (ta) may be typed as `ナ=`
(katakana _na_ , equals sign) or `†こ` (dagger, hiragana _ko_ ). Katakana is
frequently replaced by similar-looking kanji, such as 世 for セ (se) or 干 for チ
(chi), in a reversal of the process that turned man'yōgana into kana. Kana and
rōmaji may be mixed freely, even within a word, and Latin letters in rōmaji
may be replaced with similar-looking Cyrillic letters, such as replacing N
with И (Cyrillic I). Compound kanji are decomposed into left and right
elements, which are written as individual kanji or kana. For example, the
kanji 好 in 好き, meaning "like, enjoy" may be split into 女子 (the kanji for woman
and child, respectively).

In addition to the basic obfuscation provided by character replacement,
another technique used to disguise the content of the message is to use
vocabulary and grammar that is uncharacteristic of standard usage.[3] Combined
with character substitution, this can make the meaning of the message almost
unintelligible to those not “in the know”. This is analogous to the use of
leet’s specialized grammar. However, the flexible nature of the Japanese
language means that although gyaru-moji phrases sound peculiar to someone
expecting formal or even commonly colloquial Japanese, they are often
technically still grammatically correct.

For example, the sentence 「私は今とても良い気分です。」 (“Watashi wa ima totemo yoi kibun
desu.”) is “Right now I am feeling very good.” in standard normal-polite
Japanese. By first rewording this as 「超気持ちいい！」 or 「チョーキモチイイ！」 (“Chōkimochi
ii!”) – which roughly translates as “(I have a) Super good feeling!” – and
then converting to gyaru-moji to get 「走召 氣 持 ち ぃ ぃ !」 or 「于∋─≠モ于ｲｲ！」, the
message could prove difficult for those not versed in the style to understand.

The original Japanese hiragana followed by romaji, and then various versions
of the Japanese character in gyaru moji. The following chart is also available
in image form.

Here are some examples of gyaru-moji created from compound kanji. The kanji
characters are followed by their reading and meaning, and the gyaru-moji
derived from them:

As a youth culture element produced by women, gyaru-moji is not well-received
by the older Japanese public. From a traditionalist perspective, gyaru-moji
rejects the elegant, painstaking brushstrokes of Japanese writing embraced by
the art of shodo. From a contemporary perspective, gyaru-moji may be likened
to other, comical recent scripts, such as the bubble-like _maru-moji_ from the
1980s. Since its widespread use in the early 2000s, television programs and
public attention has taken note of gyaru-moji. However, this innovative
writing system subverts cultural norms and breaks linguistic barriers,
characterizing gyaru-moji with a rebellious nature.[1]

