**Hala Basha-Gorani** (born 1 March 1970) in Seattle, Washington, USA, was
raised for a time in St. Louis, Missouri, then moved to Algeria with her
family,[1] but spent most of her childhood with her parents in Paris,
France.[2] She is of Syrian-American descent and is now an anchor and senior
correspondent for CNN International, based in London. She anchors CNN's _Hala
Gorani Tonight_ weeknights at 8 p.m. CET.[3][4] Gorani co-hosted Your World
Today with Jim Clancy until February 2009 and then International Desk until
April 2014 from CNN's Atlanta headquarters.

Gorani began her career as a reporter for _La Voix du Nord_ and Agence France-
Presse before joining France 3 in 1994. After a stint at Bloomberg Television
in London, she joined CNN in 1998 as an anchor for CNN International’s
European breakfast show _CNN Today_. She has since reported from every country
in the Middle East. In November 2005, Gorani was one of the first television
reporters on the ground in Amman, Jordan after Al Qaeda suicide bombers
attacked two hotels. Earlier in 2005, she covered Israel's unilateral
disengagement plan from Gaza. In the summer of 2006, she covered the 2006
Lebanon-Israel war from Lebanon, which earned CNN an Edward R. Murrow
Award.[5] In 2002 and in 2007, she led CNN's coverage of the respective French
presidential elections.[5]

Gorani was one of the CNN journalists awarded a News and Documentary Emmy for
the network's coverage of the 2011 Egyptian revolution that led to the ouster
of the country's then president, Hosni Mubarak. In 2015, she covered from
Paris the January Charlie Hebdo shooting and the November ISIS attacks.

Gorani also covered the devastating 2010 Haiti earthquake, for which CNN’s
coverage was recognized with a Golden Nymph award, one of the highest honors
in international journalism, at the Monte-Carlo Television Festival that year.
In addition to her anchoring duties, Gorani often goes into the field to
report on major breaking news stories. In late June, she was part of a small
team of journalists allowed into Syria for the first time since the protests
began to cover the situation there. She previously reported extensively from
Jordan and Egypt, and her coverage of the Arab Spring helped CNN win a Peabody
Award in 2012.[6]

In 2008, Gorani attended the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, and
she moderated the closing session that featured several business and political
leaders including Tony Blair, Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Elie Wiesel and JP
Morgan Chase & Co. Chairman and CEO James Dimon.

Gorani formerly hosted _Inside the Middle East_ on CNN International, the
monthly show featuring stories on the most important social, political and
cultural issues in the region. During her five years as host, she reported on
several colorful and thought-provoking stories including poverty in oil-rich
Bahrain; everyday struggles for artists living in Iraq; and gay life in the
Middle East, which was a first on international television and earned a
nomination for a Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation (GLAAD) award.[7]

Gorani has interviewed Jimmy Carter, Tony Blair, Amr Moussa, Rafik Hariri,
Saeb Erakat, Nouri al-Maliki, Ehud Barak, the Dalai Lama, Shimon Peres and
Carla Bruni, among others.[8] Gorani avoids discussing her political and
religious views, citing the need for professional neutrality.[9]

In May 2015, Gorani was awarded an honorary doctorate by George Mason
University and delivered the commencement address to that year's graduating
students.[10][11]

On the weekend of 13–15 November 2015, Gorani was a principal member of the
extensive CNN team that covered the action, aftermath and investigation of
terrorist attacks in Paris, France where some 130 people were killed.

In 2018, Gorani was nominated for another News and Documentary Emmy for
Outstanding Breaking News Coverage, Manchester Concert Attack.[12] That same
year, she and her team received an Emmy Award for her show's coverage of
"Syria: Gasping for Life in Khan Sheikhoun."[13]

In a commencement address, Gorani offered these observations to the new
graduates: Gorani says that as a journalist, career defining moments are those
where one can identify that the work did make a difference; and the being
different is a good thing because those differences will make a person
memorable. Gorani advised the students to cultivate their differences and from
them the students will find their strength. [1]

Gorani was born in 1970 in Seattle, Washington.[2] According to her, she comes
from "quite an international background[...] I'm a U.S. citizen with Syrian
parents."[14]

Gorani was mainly raised in Paris, France. She has also lived in Algeria. Her
name "Ha'la" is a common Arabic name meaning "halo around the moon." She
earned a Bachelor of Science in economics from George Mason University in
Fairfax, Virginia, near Washington, D.C., and graduated from the Institut
d'études politiques (better known as Sciences Po) in Paris in 1995.[2] Due to
her multi-national experiences during her formative years, the sound of her
name, and her accent, Gorani says that she is a foreigner wherever she goes.
[1]

Gorani is fluent in English, French and Arabic. She considers Paris her home,
which is also where her mother resides.[15]

From 2004 to 2014, she was based at the CNN Center in Atlanta, Georgia, and in
2014 she moved back to London.[2]

French novelist Yann Moix also dedicated his first novel _Jubilations Vers le
Ciel_ to her in 1996.

Gorani married German CNN photojournalist Christian Streib on June 14, 2015,
in Jardin Majorelle, Morocco.[16]

Gorani has a Cavalier King Charles Spaniel dog named Louis Gorani Streib that
appears with she and her husband frequently on her Instagram account. The dog
is the subject of an Instagram account they run in his name to capture Louis
the dog's exploits.

