**Hampton University** is a private historically black university in Hampton,
Virginia. It was founded in 1868 by black and white leaders of the American
Missionary Association after the American Civil War to provide education to
freedmen. It is home to the Hampton University Museum, which is the oldest
museum of the African diaspora in the United States, and the oldest museum in
the commonwealth of Virginia.[2] In 1878, it established a program for
teaching Native Americans that lasted until 1923.

The campus looking south across the harbor of Hampton Roads was founded on the
grounds of "Little Scotland", a former plantation in Elizabeth City County not
far from Fortress Monroe and the Grand Contraband Camp that gathered nearby.
These facilities represented freedom to former slaves, who sought refuge with
Union forces during the first year of the war.

The American Missionary Association (AMA) responded in 1861 to the former
slaves' need for education by hiring its first teacher, Mary Smith Peake, who
had secretly been teaching slaves and free blacks in the area despite the
state's prohibition in law. She first taught for the AMA on September 17,
1861, and was said to gather her pupils under a large oak. After the tree was
the site of the first reading in the former Confederate states of the
Emancipation Proclamation in 1863, it was called the Emancipation Oak. The
tree, now a symbol of the university and of the city, is part of the National
Historic Landmark District at Hampton University.

The **Hampton Agricultural and Industrial Schoo** l, later called the
**Hampton Institute** , was founded in 1868 after the war by the biracial
leadership of the AMA, who were chiefly Congregational and Presbyterian
ministers. It was first led by former Union General Samuel Chapman
Armstrong.[3] Among the school's famous alumni is Dr. Booker T. Washington, an
educator who founded the Tuskegee Institute.

During the American Civil War (1861–1865), Union-held Fortress Monroe in
southeastern Virginia at the mouth of Hampton Roads became a gathering point
and safe haven of sorts for fugitive slaves. The commander, General Benjamin
F. Butler, determined they were "contraband of war", to protect them from
being returned to slaveholders, who clamored to reclaim them. As numerous
individuals sought freedom behind Union lines, the Army arranged for the
construction of the Grand Contraband Camp nearby, from materials reclaimed
from the ruins of Hampton, which had been burned by the retreating Confederate
Army. This area was later called "Slabtown."[4][5]

Hampton University traces its roots to the work of Mary S. Peake, which began
in 1861 with outdoor classes which she taught under the landmark Emancipation
Oak in the nearby area of Elizabeth City County. The newly issued Emancipation
Proclamation was first read to a gathering under the historic tree there in
1863.[4][6]

After the War, a normal school (teacher training school) was formalized in
1868, with former Union brevet Brigadier General Samuel C. Armstrong
(1839–1893) as its first principal. The new school was established on the
grounds of a former plantation named "Little Scotland", which had a view of
Hampton Roads. The original school buildings fronted the Hampton River.
Legally chartered in 1870 as a land grant school, it was first known as
Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute.

Typical of historically black colleges, Hampton received much of its financial
support in the years following the Civil War from the American Missionary
Association (whose black and white leaders represented the Congregational and
Presbyterian churches), other church groups and former officers and soldiers
of the Union Army. One of the many Civil War veterans who gave substantial
sums to the school was General William Jackson Palmer, a Union cavalry
commander from Philadelphia. He later built the Denver and Rio Grande Western
Railroad, and founded Colorado Springs, Colorado. As the Civil War began in
1861, although his Quaker upbringing made Palmer abhor violence, his passion
to see the slaves freed compelled him to enter the war. He was awarded the
Medal of Honor for bravery in 1894. (The current Palmer Hall on the campus is
named in his honor.)

Unlike the wealthy Palmer, Sam Armstrong was the son of a missionary to the
Sandwich Islands (which later became the U.S. state of Hawaii). He also had
dreams for the betterment of the freedmen. He patterned his new school after
the model of his father, who had overseen the teaching of reading, writing and
arithmetic to the Polynesians. He wanted to teach the skills necessary for
blacks to be self-supporting in the impoverished South. Under his guidance, a
Hampton-style education became well known as an education that combined
cultural uplift with moral and manual training. Armstrong said it was an
education that encompassed "the head, the heart, and the hands."

At the close of its first decade, the school reported a total admission in the
ten years of 927 students, with 277 graduates, all but 17 of whom had become
teachers. Many of them had bought land and established themselves in homes;
many were farming as well as teaching; some had gone into business. Only a
very small proportion failed to do well. By another 10 years, there had been
over 600 graduates. In 1888, of the 537 still alive, three-fourths were
teaching, and about half as many undergraduates were also teaching. It was
estimated that 15,000 children in community schools were being taught by
Hampton's students and alumni that year.[7]

Among Hampton's earliest students was Booker T. Washington, who arrived from
West Virginia in 1872 at the age of 16. He worked his way through Hampton, and
then went on to attend Wayland Seminary in Washington D.C. After graduation,
he returned to Hampton and became a teacher. Upon recommendation of Sam
Armstrong to the founder Lewis Adams and others, of a small new school in
Tuskegee Alabama that had begun in 1874. In 1881, Washington went to Tuskegee
at age 25 to strengthen it and develop it to the status of a Normal school,
one recognized as being able to produce qualified teachers. This new
institution eventually became Tuskegee University. Embracing much of
Armstrong's philosophy, Washington built Tuskegee into a substantial school
and became nationally famous as an educator, orator, and fund-raiser as well.
He collaborated with the philanthropist Julius Rosenwald in the early 20th
century to create a model for rural black schools – Rosenwald established a
fund that matched monies raised by communities to build more than 5,000
schools for rural black children, mostly in the South. Washington recruited
his Hampton classmate (1875), Charles W. Greene [8] to the work at Tuskegee in
1888 to found the Agriculture Department. Washington and Greene recruited
George Washington Carver to the Tuskegee Agriculture faculty upon his
graduation with a master's degree from Iowa State University in 1896. Carver
provided such technical strength in Agriculture that in 1900, Booker T.
Washington assigned Greene to establish a demonstration of black business
capability and economic independence off-campus in Tuskegee. This project,
entirely black-owned, comprised 4,000 lots of real estate and was formally
established and designated Greenwood in 1901, as a demonstration for black-
owned business and residential districts in every city in the nation with a
significant black population. After Booker T. Washington visited Tulsa, in
what is now Tulsa Oklahoma in 1905 and addressed a large gathering there, the
Oklahomans followed the Tuskegee model and named Tulsa's black-owned and
operated district "Greenwood" in 1906.

In 1878, Hampton established a formal education program for Native Americans.
In 1875 at the end of the American Indian Wars, the United States Army sent
seventy-two warriors from the Cheyenne, Kiowa, Comanche and Caddo Nations, to
imprisonment and exile in St. Augustine, Florida. Essentially they were
considered hostages to persuade their peoples in the West to keep peace.
Richard Henry Pratt supervised them at Fort Marion and began to arrange for
their education in the English language and American culture. Numerous
visitors to St. Augustine from the North became interested in their cases and
volunteered as teachers. They also provided them with art supplies, and some
of the resulting works (including by David Pendleton Oakerhater) are held by
the Smithsonian Institution. At the end of the warriors' incarceration, Pratt
convinced seventeen to enroll at Hampton Institute for a fuller education.[9]
(Later Pratt founded the Carlisle Indian Industrial School based on the same
philosophy of education and assimilation). Altogether, seventy Native
Americans, young men and women from various tribes, mostly from the Plains
rather than the acculturated tribes that had occupied Virginia, joined that
first class. Because Virginia's aristocrats sometimes boasted of their Native
American heritage through Pocahontas, it was hoped that the Native American
students would help locals to accept the university's black students. The
black students were also supposed to "civilize" the Native American students
to current American society, and the Native Americans to "uplift the
Negro[es]."[10][11]

The program died in 1923, in the face of growing controversy over racial
mingling. Native Americans stopped sending their boys to the school after some
employers fired Native American men because they had been educated with
blacks. The program's final director resigned because she could not prevent
"amalgamation" between the Native American girls and black boys.[11]

Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute became simply Hampton Institute in
1930. In 1931 the George P. Phenix School for all age groups was opened there
under principal Ian Ross. A new nurses' training school was attached to the
Dixie Hospital, with Nina Gage as director.[12] In 1945 the Austrian-American
psychologist, art educator, and author of the influential text book _Creative
and Mental Growth_[13] Viktor Lowenfeld joined the Hampton faculty as an
assistant professor of industrial arts and eventually became chair of the Art
Department. By 1971 the university offered 42 evening classes in programs
including "Educational Psychology", "Introduction to Oral Communication",
"Modern Mathematics", and "Playwriting", among others.[14] At the time, the
tuition cost for these courses was $30 per semester hour.[14] With the
addition of departments and graduate programs, it became Hampton University in
1984.[15] Originally located in Elizabeth City County, it was long-located in
the Town of Phoebus, incorporated in 1900. Phoebus and Elizabeth City County
were consolidated with the neighboring City of Hampton to form a much larger
independent city in 1952. The City of Hampton uses the Emancipation Oak on its
official seal. From 1960 to 1970, noted diplomat and educator Jerome H.
Holland was president of the Hampton Institute.

In early 2018, Hampton University students launched a protest calling for the
university administration to address several concerns they believed to be
longstanding and urgent, including food quality, living conditions, and sexual
assault.[16] Students shared videos and photos related to these concerns.[17]
The university released a statement indicating that it was "moving forward" to
address student concerns and issues.[18]

The campus contains several buildings that contribute to its National Historic
Landmark district: Virginia-Cleveland Hall (freshman female dormitory, as well
as former home to the school's two cafeterias), Wigwam building (home to
administrative offices), Academy Building (administrative offices), Memorial
Chapel (religious services) and the President's Mansion House.[19][20]

The original High School on the campus became Phenix Hall when Hampton City
Public Schools opened a new Phenix High School in 1962. Phenix Hall was
damaged in a minor fire on June 12, 2008.[21]

The Hampton University Museum was founded in 1868 and is the nation's oldest
African-American museum. The museum contains over 9,000 pieces, some of which
are highly acclaimed.[22]

Hampton University is home to 16 research centers.[23] The Hampton University
Proton Therapy Institute is the largest free-standing facility of its kind in
the world.[24]

The four libraries on campus are the William R. and Norma B. Harvey Library
(main library), William H. Moses Jr. Architecture Library, the Music Library,
and the Nursing Library.[25]

The Emancipation Oak was cited by the National Geographic Society as one of
the 10 great trees in the world.

The waterfront campus is settled near the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay.

A 15-acre (61,000 m2) portion of the campus along the Hampton River, including
many of the older buildings, is a U.S. National Historic Landmark District.
Buildings included are:

In addition, Cleveland Hall, Ogden, and the Administration building are also
included in the district.[29]

The district was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in
1969,[26] and declared a National Historic Landmark in 1974.[28][29]

As reported by the university in 2015, nearly two-thirds of the student body
is female, and the other third male. Approximately 90% of the population
identifies as Black, and only 32% are Virginia residents.[30]

Hampton University has 10 accredited schools and colleges.[31]

The Freddye T. Davy Honors College is a non-degree granting college that
offers special learning opportunities and privileges to the most high-
achieving undergraduates. To join the honors college, students must formally
accept an invitation given by the college or directly apply for admissions
into the college.[32]

As of 2018[update], Hampton offers 50 baccalaureate programs, 26 master's
programs, 7 doctoral programs, 2 professional programs, and 10
associate/certificate programs.[33]

Hampton University consistently ranks among the top three HBCUs in the nation
in various rankings. Hampton has the second highest graduation rate among
HBCUs.[34][35]

Hampton's student to faculty ratio is 10 to 1, which is better than the
national university average of 18 to 1.[33][36]

Hampton is the first and only HBCU to have 100% control of a NASA Mission.[37]

_The Alumni Factor_ named Hampton one of the seven best colleges in
Virginia.[38]

Hampton University is classified as a selective admissions institution.[39]

Hampton's colors are blue and white, and their nickname is "The Pirates".
Hampton sports teams participate in NCAA Division I (FCS for football) in the
Big South Conference. They joined this in 2018 upon leaving the Mid-Eastern
Athletic Conference. Before joining the Big South, Hampton won MEAC titles in
many sports, including football, men's and women's basketball, men's and
women's track, and men's and women's tennis. Hampton is one of two NCAA
Division 1 HBCU institutions (along with Tennessee State University, in the
Ohio Valley Conference) to not be a member of the Mid-Eastern Athletic
Conference or Southwestern Athletic Conference.

In 2016, Hampton became the first and only HBCU to field a Division I men's
lacrosse team. ESPN held a broadcast on campus preceding the inaugural game in
Armstrong Stadium.[40][41]

Hampton is the only HBCU with a competitive sailing team.

In 2001, the Hampton basketball team won its first NCAA Tournament game, when
they beat Iowa State 58–57, in one of the largest upsets of all time. They
were only the fourth fifteen-seed to upset a two-seed in the tournament's
history. They returned to the tournament a year later, as well as in 2006,
2011, 2015 and 2016, having won their conference basketball tournament. Their
NCAA tournament record is 2–6, including the play-in game.

The "Lady Pirates" basketball team has seen great success as well, and made
trips to the NCAA tournament in 2000, 2003, 2004, 2010–2014, and 2017. In
1988, as a Division II school, the Lady Pirates won the NCAA Women's Division
II Basketball Championship, defeating West Texas State. In 2011, as a
number-13 seed, the Lady Pirates nearly upset Kentucky, but fell in overtime,
66-62. In 2015, the Lady Pirates played in the Women's NIT, where they
defeated Drexel 45-42 in the opening round. However, in the second round, the
team lost to West Virginia 57-39.

The Pirates won their conference title in football in 1997, shared the title
1998 and 2004, and won it again outright in 2005 and 2006. From 2004 to 2006,
the team won three MEAC Championships and three SBN-Black College National
Championships, and was ranked in the Division I FCS top 25 poll each year. The
Pirates also sent five players to the NFL Combine in 2007, the most out of any
FCS subdivision school for that year. They have also been dominant in tennis,
winning the MEAC from 1996 to 1999, 2001–2003 and 2007 for the men, and 1998
and 2002–2004 for the women.

Major rivals include Norfolk State University, located across Hampton Roads in
downtown Norfolk, and Howard University in Washington, D.C.

Pirate athletics are supported by a plethora of groups, including "The Force"
Marching Band. The marching band has appeared at several notable events,
including a Barack Obama Presidential Inauguration parade in Washington, DC.
"The Force" was chosen out of a large pool of applicants to participate in the
parade as the representative for the state of Virginia. "The Force" is
complemented by the "Ebony Fire" all-women dance team, as well as "Silky", the
flag team, and as of 2018, "Shimmering Sapphire Elegance" the majorette team.
On January 4, 2019, The Force announced that they will be the first HBCU to
participate in the 2020 Rome New Years Day Parade.

