**Helen Menken** (December 12, 1901 – March 27, 1966) was an American actress.

Menken was born **Helen Meinken** in New York City, to a German-French father,
Frederick Meinken, and an Irish-born mother, Mary Madden. Her parents were
deaf, and her early communication came via sign language. She did not begin
talking until age 4.[1]

Originally a teenage actress who made her Broadway theatre debut in _Parlor,
Bedroom and Bath_ in 1917.[2] Her greatest stage triumphs were _Seventh
Heaven_ in 1922–1924 (Janet Gaynor played her role of Diane in the 1927 film
version); _Mary of Scotland_ in 1933–1934 as Elizabeth I opposite Helen Hayes
in the title role (Katharine Hepburn played Mary in the 1936 film version);
and _The Old Maid_ , the Pulitzer Prize-winning play that starred Menken and
Judith Anderson in 1935. Bette Davis would play Menken's role as the spinster
with a secret in the 1939 film version. Menken's final Broadway appearance was
in an unsuccessful play named _The Laughing Woman_ , which ran for less than a
month in 1937.

Her performance as Irene De Montcel in the first English-language production
of _The Captive,_ Edouard Bourdet's lesbian-themed drama, led to her arrest
(along with the rest of the cast) on February 9, 1927. This arrest, reflecting
1920s attitudes about homosexuality, contributed to her lack of a film career
and possibly to her divorce from Bogart.

Menken was a major presence behind the scenes in the theater world, especially
at the American Theatre Wing. She served as its chairman during World War II
and began serving as president of the group in 1957.[1]

Menken was active on radio in the 1940s (starring as Brenda Cummings in
_Second Husband_[3] and notably recreating her performance opposite Judith
Anderson in a 1946 radio adaption of _The Old Maid_ ).

Menken made a short film in New York City in 1925 for Lee DeForest, filmed in
the short-lived DeForest Phonofilm sound-on-film process. The film is
preserved in the Maurice Zouary collection at the Library of Congress.

Menken received a special Tony Award posthumously in 1966 "for a lifetime of
devotion and dedicated service to the Broadway theatre."[4]

The first of her four husbands was actor Humphrey Bogart. She was Bogart's
first wife. They were married at the Gramercy Park Hotel in New York City on
May 20, 1926, and she divorced him November 18, 1927. She married Dr. Henry T.
Smith on July 12, 1932 and divorced him in 1947, then in October 1948 married
George N. Richard who survived her.

Menken died of a heart attack at a party at The Lambs on March 27, 1966,[1] at
the age of 64.

