This page will help you to fix the cite error message:  
  
**Alist-defined reference named "$1" is not used in the content (see the help
page). **  
  

A footnote used multiple times may be defined with a name:

To invoke a named footnote:

References may also be defined within the reference list:

List-defined references may be invoked by the standard markup or by use of
{{r}}.

All references defined in the reference list must be invoked in the content.
Unused references must be removed or commented out.

Including more than one nested reference in List-defined references will cause
a Cite error.

Misusing a template that was never intended as a citation template and placing
it in `<ref>` tags may cause this issue.

A template that creates `<ref>` tags; known instances:

A template that includes table markup; known instances:

Ex. 1) There are three references defined in the list, but none are invoked in
the content. Note the spurious error for the first reference named _ipsum_ :

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam,
quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo
consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse
cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur.

Cite error: A list-defined reference with group name `""` is not used in the
content (see the help page).  
Cite error: A list-defined reference with group name `""` is not used in the
content (see the help page).  
Cite error: A list-defined reference with group name `""` is not used in the
content (see the help page).

Ex. 2) If only one reference is defined but not invoked, then only the
spurious error is shown:

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua. Ut enim ad minim veniam,
quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea commodo
consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit esse
cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur.

Cite error: A list-defined reference with group name `""` is not used in the
content (see the help page).

Ex. 3) Not so obvious case. If you mistakenly nest an {{sfn}} type template
inside <ref></ref> as in the second footnote below, an error message will
show:

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipisicing elit, sed do eiusmod
tempor incididunt ut labore et dolore magna aliqua.[1] Ut enim ad minim
veniam, quis nostrud exercitation ullamco laboris nisi ut aliquip ex ea
commodo consequat. Duis aute irure dolor in reprehenderit in voluptate velit
esse cillum dolore eu fugiat nulla pariatur.[2]

Cite error: A list-defined reference named "FOOTNOTEFoo1999123" is not used in
the content (see the help page).

Pages with this error message are placed into Pages with incorrect ref
formatting. The system message page is at Cite error references missing key.

