**Infection** is the invasion of an organism's body tissues by disease-causing
agents, their multiplication, and the reaction of host tissues to the
infectious agents and the toxins they produce.[1][2] **Infectious disease** ,
also known as **transmissible disease** or **communicable disease** , is
illness resulting from an infection.

Infections are caused by infectious agents (pathogens) including:

Hosts can fight infections using their immune system. Mammalian hosts react to
infections with an innate response, often involving inflammation, followed by
an adaptive response.[3]

Specific medications used to treat infections include antibiotics, antivirals,
antifungals, antiprotozoals, and antihelminthics. Infectious diseases resulted
in 9.2 million deaths in 2013 (about 17% of all deaths).[4] The branch of
medicine that focuses on infections is referred to as infectious disease.[5]

Symptomatic infections are _apparent_ and _clinical_ , whereas an infection
that is active but does not produce noticeable symptoms may be called
_inapparent,_ _silent,_ _subclinical_ , or occult. An infection that is
inactive or dormant is called a _latent infection_.[6] An example of a latent
bacterial infection is latent tuberculosis. Some viral infections can also be
latent, examples of latent viral infections are any of those from the
_Herpesviridae_ family.

The word _infection_ can denote any presence of a particular pathogen at all
(no matter how little) but also is often used in a sense implying a
_clinically apparent_ infection (in other words, a case of infectious
disease).[7] This fact occasionally creates some ambiguity or prompts some
usage discussion. To get around the usage annoyance, it is common for health
professionals to speak of _colonization_ (rather than _infection_ ) when they
mean that some of the pathogens are present but that no clinically apparent
infection (no disease) is present.

Different terms are used to describe infections. The first is an acute
infection. An acute infection is one in which symptoms develop rapidly; its
course can either be rapid or protracted. The next is a chronic infection. A
chronic infection is when symptoms develop gradually, over weeks or months,
and are slow to resolve. A subacute infection is one in which symptoms take
longer to develop than in an acute infection but arise more quickly than a
chronic infection. A latent infection is a type of infection that may occur
after an acute episode; the organism is present but symptoms are not; after
time the disease can reappear. A focal infection is defined as the initial
site of infection from which organisms travel via the bloodstream to another
area of the body.[8]

Among the many varieties of microorganisms, relatively few cause disease in
otherwise healthy individuals.[9] Infectious disease results from the
interplay between those few pathogens and the defenses of the hosts they
infect. The appearance and severity of disease resulting from any pathogen,
depends upon the ability of that pathogen to damage the host as well as the
ability of the host to resist the pathogen. However a host's immune system can
also cause damage to the host itself in an attempt to control the infection.
Clinicians therefore classify infectious microorganisms or microbes according
to the status of host defenses - either as _primary pathogens_ or as
_opportunistic pathogens_ :

Other types of infection consist of mixed, latrogenic, nosocomial, and
community-acquired infection. A mixed infection is an infection that is cause
by two or more pathogens. An example of this is Appendicitis, which is caused
by Bacteroides fragilis and Escherichia coli. The second is a latrogenic
infection. This type of infection is one that is transmitted from a health
care worker to a patient. A nosocomial infection is also one that occurs in a
health care setting. Nosocomial infections are those that are acquired during
a hospital stay. Lastly a community-acquired infection is one in which the
infection is acquired from a whole community.[8]

One way of proving that a given disease is "infectious", is to satisfy Koch's
postulates (first proposed by Robert Koch), which require that first, the
infectious agent be identifiable only in patients who have the disease, and
not in healthy controls, and second, that patients who contract the infectious
agent also develop the disease. These postulates were first used in the
discovery that Mycobacteria species cause tuberculosis.

However, Koch's postulates cannot usually be tested in modern practice for
ethical reasons. Proving them would require experimental infection of a
healthy individual with a pathogen produced as a pure culture. Conversely,
even clearly infectious diseases do not always meet the infectious criteria;
for example, _Treponema pallidum_ , the causative spirochete of syphilis,
cannot be cultured _in vitro_ – however the organism can be cultured in rabbit
testes. It is less clear that a pure culture comes from an animal source
serving as host than it is when derived from microbes derived from plate
culture.

Epidemiology, or the study and analysis of in who, why and where disease
occurs, and what determines whether various populations have a disease, is
another important tool used to understand infectious disease. Epidemiologists
may determine differences among groups within a population, such as whether
certain age groups have a greater or lesser rate of infection; whether groups
living in different neighborhoods are more likely to be infected; and by other
factors, such as gender and race. Researchers also may assess whether a
disease outbreak is sporadic, or just an occasional occurrence; endemic, with
a steady level of regular cases occurring in a region; epidemic, with a fast
arising, and unusually high number of cases in a region; or pandemic, which is
a global epidemic. If the cause of the infectious disease is unknown,
epidemiology can be used to assist with tracking down the sources of
infection.

Infectious diseases are sometimes called contagious disease when they are
easily transmitted by contact with an ill person or their secretions (e.g.,
influenza). Thus, a contagious disease is a subset of infectious disease that
is especially infective or easily transmitted. Other types of infectious,
transmissible, or communicable diseases with more specialized routes of
infection, such as vector transmission or sexual transmission, are usually not
regarded as "contagious", and often do not require medical isolation
(sometimes loosely called quarantine) of victims. However, this specialized
connotation of the word "contagious" and "contagious disease" (easy
transmissibility) is not always respected in popular use. Infectious diseases
are commonly transmitted from person to person through direct contact. The
types of contact are through person to person and droplet spread. Indirect
contact such as airborne transmission, contaminated objects, food and drinking
water, animal person contact, animal reservoirs, insect bites, and
environmental reservoirs are another way infectious diseases are
transmitted,[11]

Infections can be classified by the anatomic location or organ system
infected, including:

In addition, locations of inflammation where infection is the most common
cause include pneumonia, meningitis and salpingitis.

The symptoms of an infection depends on the type of disease. Some signs of
infection affect the whole body generally, such as fatigue, loss of appetite,
weight loss, fevers, night sweats, chills, aches and pains. Others are
specific to individual body parts, such as skin rashes, coughing, or a runny
nose.

In certain cases, infectious diseases may be asymptomatic for much or even all
of their course in a given host. In the latter case, the disease may only be
defined as a "disease" (which by definition means an illness) in hosts who
secondarily become ill after contact with an asymptomatic carrier. An
infection is not synonymous with an infectious disease, as some infections do
not cause illness in a host.[10]

Bacterial and viral infections can both cause the same kinds of symptoms. It
can be difficult to distinguish which is the cause of a specific
infection.[12] It's important to distinguish, because viral infections cannot
be cured by antibiotics.[13]

There is a general chain of events that applies to infections.[15] The chain
of events involves several steps—which include the infectious agent,
reservoir, entering a susceptible host, exit and transmission to new hosts.
Each of the links must be present in a chronological order for an infection to
develop. Understanding these steps helps health care workers target the
infection and prevent it from occurring in the first place.[16]

Infection begins when an organism successfully enters the body, grows and
multiplies. This is referred to as colonization. Most humans are not easily
infected. Those who are weak, sick, malnourished, have cancer or are diabetic
have increased susceptibility to chronic or persistent infections. Individuals
who have a suppressed immune system are particularly susceptible to
opportunistic infections. Entrance to the host at host-pathogen interface,
generally occurs through the mucosa in orifices like the oral cavity, nose,
eyes, genitalia, anus, or the microbe can enter through open wounds. While a
few organisms can grow at the initial site of entry, many migrate and cause
systemic infection in different organs. Some pathogens grow within the host
cells (intracellular) whereas others grow freely in bodily fluids.

Wound colonization refers to nonreplicating microorganisms within the wound,
while in infected wounds, replicating organisms exist and tissue is injured.
All multicellular organisms are colonized to some degree by extrinsic
organisms, and the vast majority of these exist in either a mutualistic or
commensal relationship with the host. An example of the former is the
anaerobic bacteria species, which colonizes the mammalian colon, and an
example of the latter are the various species of staphylococcus that exist on
human skin. Neither of these colonizations are considered infections. The
difference between an infection and a colonization is often only a matter of
circumstance. Non-pathogenic organisms can become pathogenic given specific
conditions, and even the most virulent organism requires certain circumstances
to cause a compromising infection. Some colonizing bacteria, such as
_Corynebacteria sp._ and _viridans streptococci_ , prevent the adhesion and
colonization of pathogenic bacteria and thus have a symbiotic relationship
with the host, preventing infection and speeding wound healing.

The variables involved in the outcome of a host becoming inoculated by a
pathogen and the ultimate outcome include:

As an example, several staphylococcal species remain harmless on the skin,
but, when present in a normally sterile space, such as in the capsule of a
joint or the peritoneum, multiply without resistance and cause harm.

An interesting fact that gas chromatography–mass spectrometry, 16S ribosomal
RNA analysis, omics, and other advanced technologies have made more apparent
to humans in recent decades is that microbial colonization is very common even
in environments that humans think of as being nearly sterile. Because it is
normal to have bacterial colonization, it is difficult to know which chronic
wounds can be classified as infected and how much risk of progression exists.
Despite the huge number of wounds seen in clinical practice, there are limited
quality data for evaluated symptoms and signs. A review of chronic wounds in
the Journal of the American Medical Association's "Rational Clinical
Examination Series" quantified the importance of increased pain as an
indicator of infection.[20] The review showed that the most useful finding is
an increase in the level of pain [likelihood ratio (LR) range, 11–20] makes
infection much more likely, but the absence of pain (negative likelihood ratio
range, 0.64–0.88) does not rule out infection (summary LR 0.64–0.88).

Disease can arise if the host's protective immune mechanisms are compromised
and the organism inflicts damage on the host. Microorganisms can cause tissue
damage by releasing a variety of toxins or destructive enzymes. For example,
_Clostridium tetani_ releases a toxin that paralyzes muscles, and
staphylococcus releases toxins that produce shock and sepsis. Not all
infectious agents cause disease in all hosts. For example, less than 5% of
individuals infected with polio develop disease.[21] On the other hand, some
infectious agents are highly virulent. The prion causing mad cow disease and
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease invariably kills all animals and people that are
infected.

Persistent infections occur because the body is unable to clear the organism
after the initial infection. Persistent infections are characterized by the
continual presence of the infectious organism, often as latent infection with
occasional recurrent relapses of active infection. There are some viruses that
can maintain a persistent infection by infecting different cells of the body.
Some viruses once acquired never leave the body. A typical example is the
herpes virus, which tends to hide in nerves and become reactivated when
specific circumstances arise.

Persistent infections cause millions of deaths globally each year.[22] Chronic
infections by parasites account for a high morbidity and mortality in many
underdeveloped countries.

For infecting organisms to survive and repeat the infection cycle in other
hosts, they (or their progeny) must leave an existing reservoir and cause
infection elsewhere. Infection transmission can take place via many potential
routes:

The relationship between _virulence versus transmissibility_ is complex; if a
disease is rapidly fatal, the host may die before the microbe can be passed
along to another host.

Diagnosis of infectious disease sometimes involves identifying an infectious
agent either directly or indirectly. In practice most minor infectious
diseases such as warts, cutaneous abscesses, respiratory system infections and
diarrheal diseases are diagnosed by their clinical presentation and treated
without knowledge of the specific causative agent. Conclusions about the cause
of the disease are based upon the likelihood that a patient came in contact
with a particular agent, the presence of a microbe in a community, and other
epidemiological considerations. Given sufficient effort, all known infectious
agents can be specifically identified. The benefits of identification,
however, are often greatly outweighed by the cost, as often there is no
specific treatment, the cause is obvious, or the outcome of an infection is
benign.

Diagnosis of infectious disease is nearly always initiated by medical history
and physical examination. More detailed identification techniques involve the
culture of infectious agents isolated from a patient. Culture allows
identification of infectious organisms by examining their microscopic
features, by detecting the presence of substances produced by pathogens, and
by directly identifying an organism by its genotype. Other techniques (such as
X-rays, CAT scans, PET scans or NMR) are used to produce images of internal
abnormalities resulting from the growth of an infectious agent. The images are
useful in detection of, for example, a bone abscess or a spongiform
encephalopathy produced by a prion.

The diagnosis is aided by the presenting symptoms in any individual with an
infectious disease, yet it usually needs additional diagnostic techniques to
confirm the suspicion. Some signs are specifically characteristic and
indicative of a disease and are called pathognomonic signs; but these are
rare. Not all infections are symptomatic.[26]

In children the presence of cyanosis, rapid breathing, poor peripheral
perfusion, or a petechial rash increases the risk of a serious infection by
greater than 5 fold.[27] Other important indicators include parental concern,
clinical instinct, and temperature greater than 40 °C.[27]

Microbiological culture is a principal tool used to diagnose infectious
disease. In a microbial culture, a growth medium is provided for a specific
agent. A sample taken from potentially diseased tissue or fluid is then tested
for the presence of an infectious agent able to grow within that medium. Most
pathogenic bacteria are easily grown on nutrient agar, a form of solid medium
that supplies carbohydrates and proteins necessary for growth of a bacterium,
along with copious amounts of water. A single bacterium will grow into a
visible mound on the surface of the plate called a colony, which may be
separated from other colonies or melded together into a "lawn". The size,
color, shape and form of a colony is characteristic of the bacterial species,
its specific genetic makeup (its strain), and the environment that supports
its growth. Other ingredients are often added to the plate to aid in
identification. Plates may contain substances that permit the growth of some
bacteria and not others, or that change color in response to certain bacteria
and not others. Bacteriological plates such as these are commonly used in the
clinical identification of infectious bacterium. Microbial culture may also be
used in the identification of viruses: the medium in this case being cells
grown in culture that the virus can infect, and then alter or kill. In the
case of viral identification, a region of dead cells results from viral
growth, and is called a "plaque". Eukaryotic parasites may also be grown in
culture as a means of identifying a particular agent.

In the absence of suitable plate culture techniques, some microbes require
culture within live animals. Bacteria such as _Mycobacterium leprae_ and
_Treponema pallidum_ can be grown in animals, although serological and
microscopic techniques make the use of live animals unnecessary. Viruses are
also usually identified using alternatives to growth in culture or animals.
Some viruses may be grown in embryonated eggs. Another useful identification
method is Xenodiagnosis, or the use of a vector to support the growth of an
infectious agent. Chagas disease is the most significant example, because it
is difficult to directly demonstrate the presence of the causative agent,
_Trypanosoma cruzi_ in a patient, which therefore makes it difficult to
definitively make a diagnosis. In this case, xenodiagnosis involves the use of
the vector of the Chagas agent _T. cruzi_ , an uninfected triatomine bug,
which takes a blood meal from a person suspected of having been infected. The
bug is later inspected for growth of _T. cruzi_ within its gut.

Another principal tool in the diagnosis of infectious disease is microscopy.
Virtually all of the culture techniques discussed above rely, at some point,
on microscopic examination for definitive identification of the infectious
agent. Microscopy may be carried out with simple instruments, such as the
compound light microscope, or with instruments as complex as an electron
microscope. Samples obtained from patients may be viewed directly under the
light microscope, and can often rapidly lead to identification. Microscopy is
often also used in conjunction with biochemical staining techniques, and can
be made exquisitely specific when used in combination with antibody based
techniques. For example, the use of antibodies made artificially fluorescent
(fluorescently labeled antibodies) can be directed to bind to and identify a
specific antigens present on a pathogen. A fluorescence microscope is then
used to detect fluorescently labeled antibodies bound to internalized antigens
within clinical samples or cultured cells. This technique is especially useful
in the diagnosis of viral diseases, where the light microscope is incapable of
identifying a virus directly.

Other microscopic procedures may also aid in identifying infectious agents.
Almost all cells readily stain with a number of basic dyes due to the
electrostatic attraction between negatively charged cellular molecules and the
positive charge on the dye. A cell is normally transparent under a microscope,
and using a stain increases the contrast of a cell with its background.
Staining a cell with a dye such as Giemsa stain or crystal violet allows a
microscopist to describe its size, shape, internal and external components and
its associations with other cells. The response of bacteria to different
staining procedures is used in the taxonomic classification of microbes as
well. Two methods, the Gram stain and the acid-fast stain, are the standard
approaches used to classify bacteria and to diagnosis of disease. The Gram
stain identifies the bacterial groups Firmicutes and Actinobacteria, both of
which contain many significant human pathogens. The acid-fast staining
procedure identifies the Actinobacterial genera _Mycobacterium_ and
_Nocardia_.

Biochemical tests used in the identification of infectious agents include the
detection of metabolic or enzymatic products characteristic of a particular
infectious agent. Since bacteria ferment carbohydrates in patterns
characteristic of their genus and species, the detection of fermentation
products is commonly used in bacterial identification. Acids, alcohols and
gases are usually detected in these tests when bacteria are grown in selective
liquid or solid media.

The isolation of enzymes from infected tissue can also provide the basis of a
biochemical diagnosis of an infectious disease. For example, humans can make
neither RNA replicases nor reverse transcriptase, and the presence of these
enzymes are characteristic., of specific types of viral infections. The
ability of the viral protein hemagglutinin to bind red blood cells together
into a detectable matrix may also be characterized as a biochemical test for
viral infection, although strictly speaking hemagglutinin is not an _enzyme_
and has no metabolic function.

Serological methods are highly sensitive, specific and often extremely rapid
tests used to identify microorganisms. These tests are based upon the ability
of an antibody to bind specifically to an antigen. The antigen, usually a
protein or carbohydrate made by an infectious agent, is bound by the antibody.
This binding then sets off a chain of events that can be visibly obvious in
various ways, dependent upon the test. For example, "Strep throat" is often
diagnosed within minutes, and is based on the appearance of antigens made by
the causative agent, _S. pyogenes_ , that is retrieved from a patient's throat
with a cotton swab. Serological tests, if available, are usually the preferred
route of identification, however the tests are costly to develop and the
reagents used in the test often require refrigeration. Some serological
methods are extremely costly, although when commonly used, such as with the
"strep test", they can be inexpensive.[10]

Complex serological techniques have been developed into what are known as
Immunoassays. Immunoassays can use the basic antibody – antigen binding as the
basis to produce an electro-magnetic or particle radiation signal, which can
be detected by some form of instrumentation. Signal of unknowns can be
compared to that of standards allowing quantitation of the target antigen. To
aid in the diagnosis of infectious diseases, immunoassays can detect or
measure antigens from either infectious agents or proteins generated by an
infected organism in response to a foreign agent. For example, immunoassay A
may detect the presence of a surface protein from a virus particle.
Immunoassay B on the other hand may detect or measure antibodies produced by
an organism's immune system that are made to neutralize and allow the
destruction of the virus.

Instrumentation can be used to read extremely small signals created by
secondary reactions linked to the antibody – antigen binding. Instrumentation
can control sampling, reagent use, reaction times, signal detection,
calculation of results, and data management to yield a cost effective
automated process for diagnosis of infectious disease.

Technologies based upon the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method will become
nearly ubiquitous gold standards of diagnostics of the near future, for
several reasons. First, the catalog of infectious agents has grown to the
point that virtually all of the significant infectious agents of the human
population have been identified. Second, an infectious agent must grow within
the human body to cause disease; essentially it must amplify its own nucleic
acids in order to cause a disease. This amplification of nucleic acid in
infected tissue offers an opportunity to detect the infectious agent by using
PCR. Third, the essential tools for directing PCR, primers, are derived from
the genomes of infectious agents, and with time those genomes will be known,
if they are not already.

Thus, the technological ability to detect any infectious agent rapidly and
specifically are currently available. The only remaining blockades to the use
of PCR as a standard tool of diagnosis are in its cost and application,
neither of which is insurmountable. The diagnosis of a few diseases will not
benefit from the development of PCR methods, such as some of the clostridial
diseases (tetanus and botulism). These diseases are fundamentally biological
poisonings by relatively small numbers of infectious bacteria that produce
extremely potent neurotoxins. A significant proliferation of the infectious
agent does not occur, this limits the ability of PCR to detect the presence of
any bacteria.

Given the wide range of bacteria, viruses, and other pathogens that cause
debilitating and life-threatening illness, the ability to quickly identify the
cause of infection is important yet often challenging. For example, more than
half of cases of encephalitis, a severe illness affecting the brain, remain
undiagnosed, despite extensive testing using state-of-the-art clinical
laboratory methods. Metagenomics is currently being researched for clinical
use, and shows promise as a sensitive and rapid way to diagnose infection
using a single all-encompassing test. This test is similar to current PCR
tests; however, amplification of genetic material is unbiased rather than
using primers for a specific infectious agent. This amplification step is
followed by next-generation sequencing and alignment comparisons using large
databases of thousands of organismic and viral genomes.

Metagenomic sequencing could prove especially useful for diagnosis when the
patient is immunocompromised. An ever-wider array of infectious agents can
cause serious harm to individuals with immunosuppression, so clinical
screening must often be broader. Additionally, the expression of symptoms is
often atypical, making clinical diagnosis based on presentation more
difficult. Thirdly, diagnostic methods that rely on the detection of
antibodies are more likely to fail. A broad, sensitive test for pathogens that
detects the presence of infectious material rather than antibodies is
therefore highly desirable.

There is usually an indication for a specific identification of an infectious
agent only when such identification can aid in the treatment or prevention of
the disease, or to advance knowledge of the course of an illness prior to the
development of effective therapeutic or preventative measures. For example, in
the early 1980s, prior to the appearance of AZT for the treatment of AIDS, the
course of the disease was closely followed by monitoring the composition of
patient blood samples, even though the outcome would not offer the patient any
further treatment options. In part, these studies on the appearance of HIV in
specific communities permitted the advancement of hypotheses as to the route
of transmission of the virus. By understanding how the disease was
transmitted, resources could be targeted to the communities at greatest risk
in campaigns aimed at reducing the number of new infections. The specific
serological diagnostic identification, and later genotypic or molecular
identification, of HIV also enabled the development of hypotheses as to the
temporal and geographical origins of the virus, as well as a myriad of other
hypothesis.[10] The development of molecular diagnostic tools have enabled
physicians and researchers to monitor the efficacy of treatment with anti-
retroviral drugs. Molecular diagnostics are now commonly used to identify HIV
in healthy people long before the onset of illness and have been used to
demonstrate the existence of people who are genetically resistant to HIV
infection. Thus, while there still is no cure for AIDS, there is great
therapeutic and predictive benefit to identifying the virus and monitoring the
virus levels within the blood of infected individuals, both for the patient
and for the community at large.

Techniques like hand washing, wearing gowns, and wearing face masks can help
prevent infections from being passed from one person to another. Aseptic
technique was introduced in medicine and surgery in the late 19th century and
greatly reduced the incidence of infections caused by surgery. Frequent hand
washing remains the most important defense against the spread of unwanted
organisms.[29] There are other forms of prevention such as avoiding the use of
illicit drugs, using a condom, wearing gloves, and having a healthy lifestyle
with a balanced diet and regular exercise. Cooking foods well and avoiding
foods that have been left outside for a long time is also important.

Antimicrobial substances used to prevent transmission of infections include:

One of the ways to prevent or slow down the transmission of infectious
diseases is to recognize the different characteristics of various
diseases.[30] Some critical disease characteristics that should be evaluated
include virulence, distance traveled by victims, and level of contagiousness.
The human strains of Ebola virus, for example, incapacitate their victims
extremely quickly and kill them soon after. As a result, the victims of this
disease do not have the opportunity to travel very far from the initial
infection zone.[31] Also, this virus must spread through skin lesions or
permeable membranes such as the eye. Thus, the initial stage of Ebola is not
very contagious since its victims experience only internal hemorrhaging. As a
result of the above features, the spread of Ebola is very rapid and usually
stays within a relatively confined geographical area. In contrast, the Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) kills its victims very slowly by attacking their
immune system.[10] As a result, many of its victims transmit the virus to
other individuals before even realizing that they are carrying the disease.
Also, the relatively low virulence allows its victims to travel long
distances, increasing the likelihood of an epidemic.

Another effective way to decrease the transmission rate of infectious diseases
is to recognize the effects of small-world networks.[30] In epidemics, there
are often extensive interactions within hubs or groups of infected individuals
and other interactions within discrete hubs of susceptible individuals.
Despite the low interaction between discrete hubs, the disease can jump to and
spread in a susceptible hub via a single or few interactions with an infected
hub. Thus, infection rates in small-world networks can be reduced somewhat if
interactions between individuals within infected hubs are eliminated (Figure
1). However, infection rates can be drastically reduced if the main focus is
on the prevention of transmission jumps between hubs. The use of needle
exchange programs in areas with a high density of drug users with HIV is an
example of the successful implementation of this treatment method. [6][ _full
citation needed_ ] Another example is the use of ring culling or vaccination
of potentially susceptible livestock in adjacent farms to prevent the spread
of the foot-and-mouth virus in 2001.[32]

A general method to prevent transmission of vector-borne pathogens is pest
control.

Infection with most pathogens does not result in death of the host and the
offending organism is ultimately cleared after the symptoms of the disease
have waned.[9] This process requires immune mechanisms to kill or inactivate
the inoculum of the pathogen. Specific acquired immunity against infectious
diseases may be mediated by antibodies and/or T lymphocytes. Immunity mediated
by these two factors may be manifested by:

The immune system response to a microorganism often causes symptoms such as a
high fever and inflammation, and has the potential to be more devastating than
direct damage caused by a microbe.[10]

Resistance to infection (immunity) may be acquired following a disease, by
asymptomatic carriage of the pathogen, by harboring an organism with a similar
structure (crossreacting), or by vaccination. Knowledge of the protective
antigens and specific acquired host immune factors is more complete for
primary pathogens than for opportunistic pathogens. There is also the
phenomenon of herd immunity which offers a measure of protection to those
otherwise vulnerable people when a large enough proportion of the population
has acquired immunity from certain infections.

Immune resistance to an infectious disease requires a critical level of either
antigen-specific antibodies and/or T cells when the host encounters the
pathogen. Some individuals develop natural serum antibodies to the surface
polysaccharides of some agents although they have had little or no contact
with the agent, these natural antibodies confer specific protection to adults
and are passively transmitted to newborns.

The organism that is the target of an infecting action of a specific
infectious agent is called the host. The host harbouring an agent that is in a
mature or sexually active stage phase is called the definitive host. The
intermediate host comes in contact during the larvae stage. A host can be
anything living and can attain to asexual and sexual reproduction.[33] The
clearance of the pathogens, either treatment-induced or spontaneous, it can be
influenced by the genetic variants carried by the individual patients. For
instance, for genotype 1 hepatitis C treated with Pegylated interferon-
alpha-2a or Pegylated interferon-alpha-2b (brand names Pegasys or PEG-Intron)
combined with ribavirin, it has been shown that genetic polymorphisms near the
human IL28B gene, encoding interferon lambda 3, are associated with
significant differences in the treatment-induced clearance of the virus. This
finding, originally reported in Nature,[34] showed that genotype 1 hepatitis C
patients carrying certain genetic variant alleles near the IL28B gene are more
possibly to achieve sustained virological response after the treatment than
others. Later report from Nature[35] demonstrated that the same genetic
variants are also associated with the natural clearance of the genotype 1
hepatitis C virus.

When infection attacks the body, _anti-infective_ drugs can suppress the
infection. Several broad types of anti-infective drugs exist, depending on the
type of organism targeted; they include antibacterial (antibiotic; including
antitubercular), antiviral, antifungal and antiparasitic (including
antiprotozoal and antihelminthic) agents. Depending on the severity and the
type of infection, the antibiotic may be given by mouth or by injection, or
may be applied topically. Severe infections of the brain are usually treated
with intravenous antibiotics. Sometimes, multiple antibiotics are used in case
there is resistance to one antibiotic. Antibiotics only work for bacteria and
do not affect viruses. Antibiotics work by slowing down the multiplication of
bacteria or killing the bacteria. The most common classes of antibiotics used
in medicine include penicillin, cephalosporins, aminoglycosides, macrolides,
quinolones and tetracyclines.[ _citation needed_ ]

Not all infections require treatment, and for many self-limiting infections
the treatment may cause more side-effects than benefits. Antimicrobial
stewardship is the concept that healthcare providers should treat an infection
with an antimicrobial that specifically works well for the target pathogen for
the shortest amount of time and to only treat when there is a known or highly
suspected pathogen that will respond to the medication.[36]

In 2010, about 10 million people died of infectious diseases.[38]

The World Health Organization collects information on global deaths by
International Classification of Disease (ICD) code categories. The following
table lists the top infectious disease by number of deaths in 2002. 1993 data
is included for comparison.

The top three single agent/disease killers are HIV/AIDS, TB and malaria. While
the number of deaths due to nearly every disease have decreased, deaths due to
HIV/AIDS have increased fourfold. Childhood diseases include pertussis,
poliomyelitis, diphtheria, measles and tetanus. Children also make up a large
percentage of lower respiratory and diarrheal deaths. In 2012, approximately
3.1 million people have died due to lower respiratory infections, making it
the number 4 leading cause of death in the world.[44]

A pandemic (or global epidemic) is a disease that affects people over an
extensive geographical area.

In most cases, microorganisms live in harmony with their hosts via mutual or
commensal interactions. Diseases can emerge when existing parasites become
pathogenic or when new pathogenic parasites enter a new host.

Several human activities have led to the emergence of zoonotic human
pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, protozoa, and rickettsia,[53] and
spread of vector-borne diseases,[52] see also globalization and disease and
wildlife disease:

A basic form of contagion theory dates back to medicine in the medieval
Islamic world, where it was proposed by Persian physician Ibn Sina (known as
Avicenna in Europe) in _The Canon of Medicine_ (1025), which later became the
most authoritative medical textbook in Europe up until the 16th century. In
Book IV of the _Canon_ , Ibn Sina discussed epidemics, outlining the classical
miasma theory and attempting to blend it with his own early contagion theory.
He mentioned that people can transmit disease to others by breath, noted
contagion with tuberculosis, and discussed the transmission of disease through
water and dirt.[55] The concept of invisible contagion was later discussed by
several Islamic scholars in the Ayyubid Sultanate who referred to them as
_najasat_ ("impure substances"). The fiqh scholar Ibn al-Haj al-Abdari (c.
1250–1336), while discussing Islamic diet and hygiene, gave warnings about how
contagion can contaminate water, food, and garments, and could spread through
the water supply, and may have implied contagion to be unseen particles.[56]

When the Black Death bubonic plague reached Al-Andalus in the 14th century,
the Arab physicians Ibn Khatima (c. 1369) and Ibn al-Khatib (1313–1374)
hypothesised that infectious diseases were caused by "minute bodies" and
described how they can be transmitted through garments, vessels and
earrings.[57] Ideas of contagion became more popular in Europe during the
Renaissance, particularly through the writing of the Italian physician
Girolamo Fracastoro.[58] Anton van Leeuwenhoek (1632–1723) advanced the
science of microscopy by being the first to observe microorganisms, allowing
for easy visualization of bacteria.

In the mid-19th century John Snow and William Budd did important work
demonstrating the contagiousness of typhoid and cholera through contaminated
water. Both are credited with decreasing epidemics of cholera in their towns
by implementing measures to prevent contamination of water.[59] Louis Pasteur
proved beyond doubt that certain diseases are caused by infectious agents, and
developed a vaccine for rabies. Robert Koch, provided the study of infectious
diseases with a scientific basis known as Koch's postulates. Edward Jenner,
Jonas Salk and Albert Sabin developed effective vaccines for smallpox and
polio, which would later result in the eradication and near-eradication of
these diseases, respectively. Alexander Fleming discovered the world's first
antibiotic, Penicillin, which Florey and Chain then developed. Gerhard Domagk
developed sulphonamides, the first broad spectrum synthetic antibacterial
drugs.

The medical treatment of infectious diseases falls into the medical field of
Infectious Disease and in some cases the study of propagation pertains to the
field of Epidemiology. Generally, infections are initially diagnosed by
primary care physicians or internal medicine specialists. For example, an
"uncomplicated" pneumonia will generally be treated by the internist or the
pulmonologist (lung physician). The work of the infectious diseases specialist
therefore entails working with both patients and general practitioners, as
well as laboratory scientists, immunologists, bacteriologists and other
specialists.

An infectious disease team may be alerted when:

A number of studies have reported associations between pathogen load in an
area and human behavior. Higher pathogen load is associated with decreased
size of ethnic and religious groups in an area. This may be due high pathogen
load favoring avoidance of other groups, which may reduce pathogen
transmission, or a high pathogen load preventing the creation of large
settlements and armies that enforce a common culture. Higher pathogen load is
also associated with more restricted sexual behavior, which may reduce
pathogen transmission. It also associated with higher preferences for health
and attractiveness in mates. Higher fertility rates and shorter or less
parental care per child is another association that may be a compensation for
the higher mortality rate. There is also an association with polygyny which
may be due to higher pathogen load, making selecting males with a high genetic
resistance increasingly important. Higher pathogen load is also associated
with more collectivism and less individualism, which may limit contacts with
outside groups and infections. There are alternative explanations for at least
some of the associations although some of these explanations may in turn
ultimately be due to pathogen load. Thus, polygny may also be due to a lower
male:female ratio in these areas but this may ultimately be due to male
infants having increased mortality from infectious diseases. Another example
is that poor socioeconomic factors may ultimately in part be due to high
pathogen load preventing economic development.[60]

Evidence of infection in fossil remains is a subject of interest for
paleopathologists, scientists who study occurrences of injuries and illness in
extinct life forms. Signs of infection have been discovered in the bones of
carnivorous dinosaurs. When present, however, these infections seem to tend to
be confined to only small regions of the body. A skull attributed to the early
carnivorous dinosaur _Herrerasaurus ischigualastensis_ exhibits pit-like
wounds surrounded by swollen and porous bone. The unusual texture of the bone
around the wounds suggests they were afflicted by a short-lived, non-lethal
infection. Scientists who studied the skull speculated that the bite marks
were received in a fight with another _Herrerasaurus_. Other carnivorous
dinosaurs with documented evidence of infection include _Acrocanthosaurus_ ,
_Allosaurus_ , _Tyrannosaurus_ and a tyrannosaur from the Kirtland Formation.
The infections from both tyrannosaurs were received by being bitten during a
fight, like the _Herrerasaurus_ specimen.[61]

A 2006 Space Shuttle experiment found that _Salmonella typhimurium_ , a
bacterium that can cause food poisoning, became more virulent when cultivated
in space.[62] On April 29, 2013, scientists in Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute, funded by NASA, reported that, during spaceflight on the
International Space Station, microbes seem to adapt to the space environment
in ways "not observed on Earth" and in ways that "can lead to increases in
growth and virulence".[63] More recently, in 2017, bacteria were found to be
more resistant to antibiotics and to thrive in the near-weightlessness of
space.[64] Microorganisms have been observed to survive the vacuum of outer
space.[65][66]

