The **International Crisis Group** ( **ICG** ; also simply known as the
**Crisis Group** ) is a transnational non-profit, non-governmental
organization founded in 1995, which describes itself as "working to prevent
wars and shape policies that will build a more peaceful world".[1]

The International Crisis Group says it provides early warning through its
monthly CrisisWatch bulletin, a global conflict tracker it says is designed to
identify risks of escalation and opportunities to advance peace. The
organisation says it produces detailed analysis and advice on specific policy
issues in conflict or potential conflict situations; and that it engages with
policy-makers, regional organisations and other key actors to promote peaceful
solutions to major conflicts; and that it offers new strategic and tactical
thinking on intractable conflicts and crises.[2]

The ICG differentiates itself from other Western think tanks by stressing its
permanent field presence, which forms the basis of its methodology.[3] It has
regional programmes covering Africa, Asia, Europe and Central Asia, Latin
America and the Caribbean, the Middle East and North Africa, and the United
States. As of August 2019[update], ICG had 110 members of staff.[4]

Investor and philanthropist George Soros provided the organization's seed
funding[a][6] and continues to support it.[b]. The first government
representative to offer financial support, of $100,000 was Martti Ahtisaari,
in March 1994.[c] That same year, Gareth Evans, as Foreign Minister of
Australia, pledged $500,000.[d].

A January 1995 meeting in London brought many international figures together,
and approved a proposal for an annual budget of $8 million and 75 full-time
staff. In mid-1995 it was formally registered in the U.S. as a tax-exempt non-
profit organisation. From 1996 to 1999, Crisis Group had an annual budget of
around $2 million and around 20 full-time staff; by 2017 its budget had risen
to over $17 million. Crisis Group receives funding under grants from
governments, charitable foundations, private companies and individual donors.
For the financial year ending June 30 2018, it received 45% of its funding
from governments, 23% from foundations, 27% from the private sector, 3% from
investment income, 2% in "kind contributions", 2% from program service revenue
and 1% from investment income.[8]

Berit Bliesemann de Guevara writes that "the organisation's funding base is
arguably not negligible" but that it is "not via the amount of economic
capital that the ICG gains its position in the field of conflict knowledge,
although money is arguably a necessary condition for its activities and
fundraising thus a constant factor in its daily operations and public
relations". She notes that "Critics have argued that it is not the amount but
the sources of the ICG's funding which have opened Western policy makers'
doors to its advocacy, while at the same time (possibly) compromising the
ICG's political independence". The ICG, she argues, "has countered the
critique of possible donor influences by pointing to the diversity of funding
sources and attached interests among Western donors, which at least
contradicts the idea of simple, straightforward connections between donors and
reporting".[3]

Crisis Group is headquartered in Brussels, with advocacy offices in Washington
DC, New York and London. Other legally registered offices are based in Bogota,
Colombia; Dakar, Senegal; Istanbul, Turkey; and Nairobi, Kenya.

As of June 2018, Crisis Group has a presence in Abu Dhabi, Abuja, Bangkok,
Beirut, Caracas, Gaza City, Guatemala City, Hong Kong, Jerusalem,
Johannesburg, Juba, Kabul, Kiev, Mexico City, Mogadishu, Rabat, Tblisi,
Toronto, Tunis and Yangon.

Robert Malley, who previously served in the Obama administration as a senior
adviser, became President & CEO of the organisation in January 2018. His
predecessor, Jean-Marie Guéhenno, a former UN Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, served as President and Chief Executive from 2014 to
the end of 2017. He was preceded by Louise Arbour, formerly the UN High
Commissioner for Human Rights and Justice of the Supreme Court of Canada. She
was preceded from January 2000 to July 2009 by Gareth Evans, former Foreign
Minister of Australia.[9]

Malley, the current ICG president, had his ties to the Obama electoral
campaign severed in May 2008, when it became public that Malley had been in
discussions with the militant Palestinian group Hamas, listed by the U.S.
State Department as a terrorist organization.[10][11]

Crisis Group Board of Trustees is chaired by Mark Malloch Brown, Former UN
Deputy Secretary-General and Administrator of the United Nations Development
Programme. The Vice Chair of the Board is Ayo Obe, lawyer, columnist and TV
presenter from Nigeria. As of June 2018 the Board consisted of the following
trustees:

Past board members have included Sandy Berger[12] and Stephen Solarz.[13][14]

Martti Ahtisaari[15]

Gareth Evans[15]

Crisis Group's "In Pursuit of Peace Award” was established in 2005, and is
associated with a gala event in New York City. Recipients include U.S.
Presidents Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush; Hillary Clinton; former
Brazilian President Lula da Silva;[16] Nobel Peace Prize laureates Martti
Ahtisaari and Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, and financier and philanthropist George
Soros.

Recipients for 2018 included Frank Giustra, founder of the Radcliffe
Foundation and a prolific entrepreneur and financier, H.R.H. Prince Zeid bin
Ra’ad Zeid al-Hussein, UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the Olympic
Refugee & Paralympic Teams.

In 2014, the journal _Third World Quarterly_ published a special issue about
the ICG and its role in knowledge production about conflict.[17] Its briefings
and reports were described as having "a generally good reputation" amongst
policymakers in the issue's introduction, which also notes that while
academics working on conflict often cite the ICG's analysis, there is little
academic research about the ICG itself.[3]

In 2010, Tom Hazeldine argued in an article published in _New Left Review_
that the ICG "styles itself as independent and non-partisan, but has
consistently championed NATO's wars to fulsome transatlantic praise".[18]

The ICG garnered controversy in April 2013 as it awarded Myanmar President
Thein Sein its "In Pursuit of Peace Award",[19] with the award ceremony
coinciding with the publication of a Human Rights Watch report of ethnic
cleansing by Sein's administration.[20][21][22]

The ICG was criticised in September 2016 for its 2011 report entitled "The
Syrian Regime's Slow-motion Suicide", with Nicholas Noe arguing: "Regrettably,
ICG's overconfidence in regime suicide not only encouraged the premature and
disastrous rejection of diplomacy that has helped prolong the Syria war. It
also essentially abdicated the main role for which peace, promotion, and
conflict mitigation NGOs exist in the first place: Advocating for strong
international engagement and negotiated solutions that regard the safety of
civilian populations as paramount".[23]

