**Non-state opponents**

The **Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant** ( **ISIL** /ˈaɪsəl, ˈaɪsɪl/),
also known as the **Islamic State of Iraq and Syria** ( **ISIS**
/ˈaɪsɪs/),[77] officially known as the **Islamic State** ( **IS** ) and also
known by its Arabic-language acronym **Daesh** (Arabic: داعش‎, romanized:
_Dāʿish_ , IPA: [ˈdaːʕɪʃ]),[78][79] is a Salafi jihadist militant group and
former unrecognised proto-state[80] that follows a fundamentalist, Salafi
doctrine of Sunni Islam.[81][82] ISIL gained global prominence in early 2014
when it drove Iraqi government forces out of key cities in its Western Iraq
offensive,[83] followed by its capture of Mosul[84] and the Sinjar
massacre.[85]

The group has been designated a terrorist organisation by the United Nations
as well as many international organisations and individual countries. ISIL is
widely known for its videos of beheadings and other types of executions[86] of
both soldiers and civilians, including journalists and aid workers, and its
destruction of cultural heritage sites.[87] The United Nations holds ISIL
responsible for committing human rights abuses, war crimes, and crimes against
humanity. ISIL also committed ethnic cleansing on a historic and unprecedented
scale in northern Iraq.[88]

ISIL originated as _Jama'at al-Tawhid wal-Jihad_ in 1999, which pledged
allegiance to al-Qaeda and participated in the Iraqi insurgency following the
2003 invasion of Iraq by Western forces at the behest of the United States. In
June 2014, the group proclaimed itself a worldwide caliphate[89][90] and began
referring to itself as the Islamic State (الدولة الإسلامية __ad-Dawlah al-
Islāmiyah__ ; IS).[91] As a caliphate, it claimed religious, political, and
military authority over all Muslims worldwide.[92] Its adoption of the name
Islamic State and its idea of a caliphate have been widely criticised, with
the United Nations, various governments, and mainstream Muslim groups
vehemently rejecting its statehood.[93]

In Syria, the group conducted ground attacks on both government forces and
opposition factions, and by December 2015, it held a large area extending from
western Iraq to eastern Syria, containing an estimated 8 to 12 million
people,[48][94][49] where it enforced its interpretation of sharia law. ISIL
is believed to be operational in 18 countries across the world, including
Afghanistan and Pakistan, with "aspiring branches" in Mali, Egypt, Somalia,
Bangladesh, Indonesia, and the Philippines.[95][96][97][98] In 2015, ISIL was
estimated to have an annual budget of more than US$1 billion and a force of
more than 30,000 fighters.[99]

In mid-2014, an international coalition led by the United States intervened
against ISIL in Syria and Iraq with a massive airstrike campaign, in addition
to supplying advisors, weapons, training, and supplies to ISIL's enemies in
the Iraqi Security Forces and Syrian Democratic Forces. This campaign
reinvigorated the latter two forces and dealt a huge blow to the nascent
Islamist proto-state, killing tens of thousands of ISIL troops[100] and
dealing significant damage to their financial and military
infrastructure.[101] This was soon followed by a smaller-scale Russian
intervention exclusively in Syria, in which ISIL lost thousands more fighters
to airstrikes and other Russian military activities and had its financial base
even further degraded.[102] In July 2017, the group lost control of its
largest city, Mosul, to the Iraqi army, followed by the loss of its de facto
political capital of Raqqa to the Syrian Democratic Forces.[103] Following
these major defeats, ISIL continued to lose territory to the various states
and other military forces allied against it, until it controlled no meaningful
territory by November 2017.[104] US military officials and simultaneous
military analyses reported in December 2017 that the group retained a mere 2
percent of the territory they had previously held.[105] On 10 December 2017,
Iraq's Prime Minister, Haider al-Abadi, said that Iraqi forces had driven the
last remnants of the Islamic State from the country, three years after the
militant group captured about a third of Iraq's territory.[106] By 23 March
2019, ISIL lost one of their last significant territories in the Middle East
in the Deir ez-Zor campaign, surrendering their "tent city" and pockets in Al-
Baghuz Fawqani to the Syrian Democratic Forces at the end of the Battle of
Baghuz Fawqani.[42]

In April 2013, having expanded into Syria, the group adopted the name __ad-
Dawlah al-Islāmiyah fī 'l-ʿIrāq wa-sh-Shām__ (الدولة الإسلامية في العراق
والشام‎). As _al-Shām_ is a region often compared with the Levant or Greater
Syria, the group's name has been variously translated as "Islamic State of
Iraq and al-Sham",[107] "Islamic State of Iraq and Syria"[108] (both
abbreviated as ISIS), or "Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" (abbreviated
as ISIL).[77]

While the use of either one or the other acronym has been the subject of
debate,[77][109] the distinction between the two and its relevance has been
considered not so great.[77] Of greater relevance is the name Daesh, which is
an acronym of ISIL's Arabic name _al-Dawlah al-Islamīyah fī l-ʻIrāq wa-sh-
Shām._ _Dāʿish_ (داعش‎), or Daesh. This name has been widely used by ISIL's
Arabic-speaking detractors,[ _clarification needed_ ][110][111] although – and
to a certain extent because – it is considered derogatory, as it resembles the
Arabic words _Daes_ ("one who crushes, or tramples down, something underfoot")
and _Dāhis_ (loosely translated: "one who sows discord").[78][112] Within
areas under its control, ISIL considers use of the name Daesh punishable by
flogging[113] or cutting out the tongue.[114]

In late June 2014, the group renamed itself __ad-Dawlah al-Islāmiyah__ (lit.
Islamic State or _IS_ ), declaring itself a worldwide caliphate.[90] The name
"Islamic State" and the group's claim to be a caliphate have been widely
rejected, with the UN, various governments, and mainstream Muslim groups
refusing to use the new name.[115][116] The group's declaration of a new
caliphate in June 2014 and its adoption of the name "Islamic State" have been
criticised and ridiculed by Muslim scholars and rival Islamists both inside
and outside the territory it controls.[115][117]

In a speech in September 2014, United States President Barack Obama said that
ISIL was neither "Islamic" (on the basis that no religion condones the killing
of innocents) nor was it a "state" (in that no government recognises the group
as a state),[118] while many object to using the name "Islamic State" owing to
the far-reaching religious and political claims to authority which that name
implies. The United Nations Security Council,[119] the United States,[118]
Canada,[120] Turkey,[121] Australia,[122] Russia,[123] the United Kingdom[124]
and other countries generally call the group "ISIL", while much of the Arab
world uses the Arabic acronym "Dāʻish" (or "Daesh"). France's Foreign Minister
Laurent Fabius said "This is a terrorist group and not a state. I do not
recommend using the term Islamic State because it blurs the lines between
Islam, Muslims, and Islamists. The Arabs call it 'Daesh' and I will be calling
them the 'Daesh cutthroats.'"[125] Retired general John Allen, the U.S. envoy
appointed to co-ordinate the coalition; U.S. Army Lieutenant General James
Terry, head of operations against the group; and Secretary of State John Kerry
had all shifted towards use of the term Daesh by December 2014.[126]

ISIL is a theocracy, proto-state[127][128][129] and a Salafi or Wahhabi
group.[11][130][131] ISIL's ideology represents radical Salafi Islam, a
strict, puritanical form of Sunni Islam.[132] Muslim organisations like
Islamic Networks Group (ING) in America have argued against this
interpretation of Islam.[133] ISIL promotes religious violence, and regards
Muslims who do not agree with its interpretations as infidels or apostates.[8]
According to Hayder al Khoei, ISIL's philosophy is represented by the
symbolism in the Black Standard variant of the legendary battle flag of
Muhammad that it has adopted: the flag shows the Seal of Muhammad within a
white circle, with the phrase above it, "There is no god but Allah".[134] Such
symbolism has been said to point to ISIL's belief that it represents the
restoration of the caliphate of early Islam, with all the political, religious
and eschatological ramifications that this would imply.[135]

ISIS adheres to global jihadist principles and follows the hard-line ideology
of al-Qaeda and many other modern-day jihadist groups,[4][8] which is closely
related to Wahhabism.

For their guiding principles, the leaders of the Islamic State ... are open
and clear about their almost exclusive commitment to the Wahhabi movement of
Sunni Islam. The group circulates images of Wahhabi religious textbooks from
Saudi Arabia in the schools it controls. Videos from the group's territory
have shown Wahhabi texts plastered on the sides of an official missionary van.

According to _The Economist_ , dissidents in the former ISIL capital of Raqqa
report that "all 12 of the judges who now run its court system ... are
Saudis". Saudi practices also followed by the group include the establishment
of religious police to root out "vice" and enforce attendance at salat
prayers, the widespread use of capital punishment, and the destruction or re-
purposing of any non-Sunni religious buildings.[137] Bernard Haykel has
described ISIL leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi's creed as "a kind of untamed
Wahhabism".[136] Senior Saudi religious leaders have issued statements
condemning ISIL[138] and attempting to distance the group from official Saudi
religious beliefs.[139]

ISIL aims to return to the early days of Islam, rejecting all innovations in
the religion, which it believes corrupts its original spirit. It condemns
later caliphates and the Ottoman Empire for deviating from what it calls pure
Islam, and seeks to revive the original Wahhabi project of the restoration of
the caliphate governed by strict Salafist doctrine. Following Salafi-Wahhabi
tradition, ISIL condemns the followers of secular law as disbelievers, putting
the current Saudi Arabian government in that category.[81]

Salafists such as ISIL believe that only a legitimate authority can undertake
the leadership of jihad, and that the first priority over other areas of
combat, such as fighting non-Muslim countries, is the purification of Islamic
society. For example, ISIL regards the Palestinian Sunni group Hamas as
apostates who have no legitimate authority to lead jihad and see fighting
Hamas as the first step toward confrontation by ISIL with Israel.[136][140]

One difference between ISIL and other Islamist and jihadist movements,
including al-Qaeda, is the group's emphasis on eschatology and apocalypticism
– that is, a belief in a final Day of Judgment by God, and specifically, a
belief that the arrival of one known as Imam Mahdi is near. ISIL believes that
it will defeat the army of "Rome" at the town of Dabiq, in fulfilment of
prophecy.[141] Following its interpretation of the Hadith of the Twelve
Successors, ISIL also believes that after al-Baghdadi there will be only four
more legitimate caliphs.[141]

The noted scholar of militant Islamism Will McCants writes:

References to the End Times fill Islamic State propaganda. It's a big selling
point with foreign fighters, who want to travel to the lands where the final
battles of the apocalypse will take place. The civil wars raging in those
countries today [Iraq and Syria] lend credibility to the prophecies. The
Islamic State has stoked the apocalyptic fire. [...] For Bin Laden's
generation, the apocalypse wasn't a great recruiting pitch. Governments in the
Middle East two decades ago were more stable, and sectarianism was more
subdued. It was better to recruit by calling to arms against corruption and
tyranny than against the Antichrist. Today, though, the apocalyptic recruiting
pitch makes more sense than before.

Since at latest 2004, a significant goal of the group has been the foundation
of a Sunni Islamic state.[143][144] Specifically, ISIL has sought to establish
itself as a caliphate, an Islamic state led by a group of religious
authorities under a supreme leader – the caliph – who is believed to be the
successor to Prophet Muhammad.[145] In June 2014, ISIL published a document in
which it claimed to have traced the lineage of its leader al-Baghdadi back to
Muhammad,[145] and upon proclaiming a new caliphate on 29 June, the group
appointed al-Baghdadi as its caliph. As caliph, he demands the allegiance of
all devout Muslims worldwide, according to Islamic jurisprudence ( _fiqh_
).[146]

ISIL has detailed its goals in its _Dabiq_ magazine, saying it will continue
to seize land and take over the entire Earth until its:

Blessed flag...covers all eastern and western extents of the Earth, filling
the world with the truth and justice of Islam and putting an end to the
falsehood and tyranny of jahiliyyah [state of ignorance], even if America and
its coalition despise such.

According to German journalist Jürgen Todenhöfer, who spent ten days embedded
with ISIL in Mosul, the view he kept hearing was that ISIL wants to "conquer
the world", and that all who do not believe in the group's interpretation of
the Quran will be killed. Todenhöfer was struck by the ISIL fighters' belief
that "all religions who agree with democracy have to die",[148] and by their
"incredible enthusiasm" – including enthusiasm for killing "hundreds of
millions" of people.[149]

When the caliphate was proclaimed, ISIL stated: "The legality of all emirates,
groups, states and organisations becomes null by the expansion of the
khilafah's [caliphate's] authority and arrival of its troops to their
areas."[145] This was a rejection of the political divisions in Southwestern
Asia that were established by the UK and France during World War I in the
Sykes–Picot Agreement.[150][151][152]

All non-Muslim areas would be targeted for conquest after the Muslim lands
were dealt with, according to the Islamist manual _Management of
Savagery_.[153][154][155]

Documents found after the death of Samir Abd Muhammad al-Khlifawi, a former
colonel in the intelligence service of the Iraqi Air Force before the US
invasion who had been described as "the strategic head" of ISIL, detailed
planning for the ISIL takeover of northern Syria which made possible "the
group's later advances into Iraq". Al-Khlifawi called for the infiltration of
areas to be conquered with spies who would find out "as much as possible about
the target towns: Who lived there, who was in charge, which families were
religious, which Islamic school of religious jurisprudence they belonged to,
how many mosques there were, who the imam was, how many wives and children he
had and how old they were". Following this surveillance and espionage would
come murder and kidnapping – "the elimination of every person who might have
been a potential leader or opponent". In Raqqa, after rebel forces drove out
the Assad regime and ISIL infiltrated the town, "first dozens and then
hundreds of people disappeared".[156]

Security and intelligence expert Martin Reardon has described ISIL's purpose
as being to psychologically "break" those under its control, "[...] so as to
ensure their absolute allegiance through fear and intimidation," while
generating, "[...]outright hate and vengeance" among its enemies.[157] Jason
Burke, a journalist writing on Salafi jihadism, has written that ISIL's goal
is to "terrorize, mobilize [and] polarize".[158][159] Its efforts to terrorise
are intended to intimidate civilian populations and force governments of the
target enemy "to make rash decisions that they otherwise would not choose". It
aims to mobilise its supporters by motivating them with, for example,
spectacular deadly attacks deep in Western territory (such as the November
2015 Paris attacks), to polarise by driving Muslim populations – particularly
in the West – away from their governments, thus increasing the appeal of
ISIL's self-proclaimed caliphate among them, and to: "Eliminate neutral
parties through either absorption or elimination".[158][160] Journalist
Rukmini Maria Callimachi also emphasises ISIL's interest in polarization or in
eliminating what it calls the "grey zone" between the black (non-Muslims) and
white (ISIL). "The gray is moderate Muslims who are living in the West and are
happy and feel engaged in the society here."[161]

A work published online in 2004 entitled _Management of Savagery_[162] (
_Idarat at Tawahoush_ ), described by several media outlets as influential on
ISIL[163][164][165] and intended to provide a strategy to create a new Islamic
caliphate,[166] recommended a strategy of attack outside its territory in
which fighters would, "Diversify and widen the vexation strikes against the
Crusader-Zionist enemy in every place in the Islamic world, and even outside
of it if possible, so as to disperse the efforts of the alliance of the enemy
and thus drain it to the greatest extent possible."[167]

The group has been accused of attempting to "bolster morale" and distract
attention from its loss of territory to enemies by staging terror attacks
abroad (such as the 6 June 2017 attacks on Tehran, the 22 May 2017 bombing in
Manchester, UK, and the 3 June 2017 attacks in London that ISIL claimed credit
for).[168]

Raqqa in Syria was under ISIL control from 2013 and in 2014 it became the
group's _de facto_ capital city.[169] On 17 October 2017, following a lengthy
battle that saw massive destruction to the city, the Syrian Democratic Forces
(SDF) announced the full capture of Raqqa from ISIL.

ISIL is headed and run by Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the Islamic State's self-
styled Caliph. Before their deaths, he had two deputy leaders, Abu Muslim al-
Turkmani for Iraq and Abu Ali al-Anbari (also known as Abu Ala al-Afri)[170]
for Syria, both ethnic Turkmen. Advising al-Baghdadi is a cabinet of senior
leaders, while its operations in Iraq and Syria are controlled by local
'emirs,' who head semi-autonomous groups which the Islamic State refers to as
its provinces.[171][172] Beneath the leaders are councils on finance,
leadership, military matters, legal matters (including decisions on
executions) foreign fighters' assistance, security, intelligence and media. In
addition, a shura council has the task of ensuring that all decisions made by
the governors and councils comply with the group's interpretation of
sharia.[173] While al-Baghdadi has told followers to "advise me when I err" in
sermons, according to observers "any threat, opposition, or even contradiction
is instantly eradicated".[174]

According to Iraqis, Syrians and analysts who study the group, almost all of
ISIL's leaders—including the members of its military and security committees
and the majority of its emirs and princes—are former Iraqi military and
intelligence officers, specifically former members of Saddam Hussein's Ba'ath
government who lost their jobs and pensions in the de-Ba'athification process
after that regime was overthrown.[178][179][180][181] The former Chief
Strategist in the Office of the Coordinator for Counterterrorism of the US
State Department, David Kilcullen, has said that "There undeniably would be no
Isis if we had not invaded Iraq."[182] It has been reported that Iraqis and
Syrians have been given greater precedence over other nationalities within
ISIL because the group needs the loyalties of the local Sunni populations in
both Syria and Iraq in order to be sustainable.[183][184] Other reports,
however, have indicated that Syrians are at a disadvantage to foreign members,
with some native Syrian fighters resenting "favouritism" allegedly shown
towards foreigners over pay and accommodation.[185][186]

In August 2016, media reports based on briefings by Western intelligence
agencies suggested that ISIL had a multilevel secret service known in Arabic
as Emni, established in 2014, that has become a combination of an internal
police force and an external operations directorate complete with regional
branches. The unit was believed to be under the overall command of ISIL's most
senior Syrian operative, spokesman and propaganda chief Abu Mohammad al-
Adnani[187][188] until his death by airstrike in late August 2016.[19]

In 2014 _The Wall Street Journal_ estimated that eight million people lived in
the Islamic State.[189] The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has
stated that ISIL "seeks to subjugate civilians under its control and dominate
every aspect of their lives through terror, indoctrination, and the provision
of services to those who obey".[190] Civilians, as well as the Islamic State
itself, have released footage of some of the human rights abuses.[191][192]

Social control of civilians was by imposition of ISIL's reading of sharia
law,[193] enforced by morality police forces known as _Al-Hisbah_ and the all-
women Al-Khanssaa Brigade, a general police force, courts, and other _entities
managing recruitment, tribal relations, and education_.[190] _Al-Hisbah_ was
led by Abu Muhammad al-Jazrawi.[194]

Estimates of the size of ISIL's military have varied widely, from tens of
thousands[196] up to 200,000.[43] In early 2015, journalist Mary Anne Weaver
estimated that half of ISIL fighters were foreigners.[197] A UN report
estimated a total of 15,000 fighters from over 80 countries were in ISIL's
ranks in November 2014.[198] US intelligence estimated an increase to around
20,000 foreign fighters in February 2015, including 3,400 from the Western
world.[199] In September 2015, the CIA estimated that 30,000 foreign fighters
had joined ISIL.[200]

According to Abu Hajjar, a former senior leader of ISIL, foreign fighters
receive food, petrol and housing, but unlike native Iraqi or Syrian fighters,
they do not receive payment in wages.[201] Since 2012, more than 3000 people
from the central Asian countries have gone to Syria, Iraq or Afghanistan to
join the Islamic State or Jabhat al Nusra.[202]

ISIL relies mostly on captured weapons with major sources including Saddam
Hussein's Iraqi stockpiles from the 2003–11 Iraq insurgency[203] and weapons
from government and opposition forces fighting in the Syrian Civil War and
during the post-US withdrawal Iraqi insurgency. The captured weapons,
including armour, guns, surface-to-air missiles, and even some aircraft,
enabled rapid territorial growth and facilitated the capture of additional
equipment.[204] For example, ISIL captured US-made TOW anti-tank missiles
supplied by the United States and Saudi Arabia to the Free Syrian Army in
Syria.[205][206] Ninety percent of the group's weapons ultimately originated
in China, Russia or Eastern Europe according to Conflict Armament
Research.[207]

The group uses truck and car bombs, suicide bombers and IEDs, and has used
chemical weapons in Iraq and Syria.[208] ISIL captured nuclear materials from
Mosul University in July 2014, but is unlikely to be able to convert them into
weapons.[209][210] In September 2015 a US official stated that ISIL was
manufacturing and using mustard agent in Syria and Iraq, and had an active
chemical weapons research team.[211][212] ISIL has also used water as a weapon
of war. The group closed the gates of the smaller Nuaimiyah dam in Fallujah in
April 2014, flooding the surrounding regions, while cutting the water supply
to the Shia-dominated south. Around 12,000 families lost their homes and 200
km2 of villages and fields were either flooded or dried up. The economy of the
region also suffered with destruction of cropland and electricity
shortages.[213]

During the Battle of Mosul, commercially-available quadcopters and drones were
being used by ISIL as surveillance and weapons delivery platforms using
improvised cradles to drop grenades and other explosives.[214] One ISIL drone
base was struck and destroyed by two Royal Air Force Tornado using two Paveway
IV guided bombs.[215]

Although ISIL attracts followers from different parts of the world by
promoting the image of holy war, not all of its recruits end up in combatant
roles. There have been several cases of new recruits expecting to be
_mujahideen_ who have returned from Syria disappointed by the everyday jobs
that were assigned to them, such as drawing water or cleaning toilets, or by
the ban imposed on use of mobile phones during military training
sessions.[216]

ISIL publishes material directed at women, with media groups encouraging them
to play supportive roles within ISIL, such as providing first aid, cooking,
nursing and sewing skills, in order to become "good wives of jihad".[217] In
2015, it was estimated that western women made up over 550, or 10%, of ISIL's
western foreign fighters.[218]

Until 2016, women were generally confined to a "women's house" upon arrival
which they were unallowed to leave. These houses were often small, dirty and
infested with vermin and food supply was scarce. There they remained until
they either had found a husband, or the husband they had arrived with had
completed his training. After being allowed to leave the confinement, women
still generally spent most of their days indoors where their lives are devoted
to caring for their husbands and the vast majority of women in the conflict
area have children. Mothers play an important role passing on ISIL ideology to
their children. Widows are encouraged to remarry.[219]

In a document entitled _Women in the Islamic State: Manifesto and Case Study_
released by the media wing of ISIL's all-female Al-Khanssaa Brigade, emphasis
is given to the paramount importance of marriage and motherhood (as early as
nine years old). Women should live a life of "sedentariness", fulfilling her
"divine duty of motherhood" at home, with a few exceptions like teachers and
doctors.[220][221] Equality for women is opposed, as is education on non-
religious subjects, the "worthless worldly sciences".[221]

ISIL is known for its extensive and effective use of propaganda.[222][223] It
uses a version of the Muslim Black Standard flag and developed an emblem which
has clear symbolic meaning in the Muslim world.[134]

In November 2006, shortly after the group's rebranding as the "Islamic State
of Iraq", it established the Al-Furqan Foundation for Media Production, which
produces CDs, DVDs, posters, pamphlets, and web-related propaganda products
and official statements.[224] It began to expand its media presence in 2013,
with the formation of a second media wing, Al-I'tisam Media Foundation, in
March[225][226] and the Ajnad Foundation for Media Production, specialising in
nasheeds and audio content, in August.[227] In mid-2014, ISIL established the
Al Hayat Media Center, which targets Western audiences and produces material
in English, German, Russian and French.[228][229] When ISIL announced its
expansion to other countries in November 2014 it established media departments
for the new branches, and its media apparatus ensured that the new branches
follow the same models it uses in Iraq and Syria.[230] Then FBI Director James
Comey said that ISIL's "propaganda is unusually slick," noting that, "They are
broadcasting... in something like 23 languages".[231]

In July 2014, al-Hayat began publishing a digital magazine called _Dabiq_ , in
a number of different languages including English.[232] According to the
magazine, its name is taken from the town of Dabiq in northern Syria, which is
mentioned in a hadith about Armageddon.[233] Al-Hayat also began publishing
other digital magazines, including the Turkish language _Konstantiniyye_ , the
Ottoman word for Istanbul,[234][235] and the French language _Dar al-
Islam_.[236] By late 2016, these magazines had apparently all been
discontinued, with Al-Hayat's material being consolidated into a new magazine
called _Rumiyah_ (Arabic for Rome).[237]

The group also runs a radio network called Al-Bayan, which airs bulletins in
Arabic, Russian and English and provides coverage of its activities in Iraq,
Syria and Libya.[238]

ISIL's use of social media has been described by one expert as "probably more
sophisticated than [that of] most US companies".[222][239] It regularly uses
social media, particularly Twitter, to distribute its messages.[239][240] The
group uses the encrypted instant messaging service Telegram to disseminate
images, videos and updates.[241]

The group is known for releasing videos and photographs of executions of
prisoners, whether beheadings, shootings, caged prisoners being burnt alive or
submerged gradually until drowned.[242] Journalist Abdel Bari Atwan described
ISIL's media content as part of a "systematically applied policy". The
escalating violence of its killings "guarantees" the attention of the media
and public.[174]

Along with images of brutality, ISIL presents itself as "an emotionally
attractive place where people 'belong', where everyone is a 'brother' or
'sister'". The "most potent psychological pitch" of ISIL media is the promise
of heavenly reward to dead jihadist fighters. Frequently posted in their media
are dead jihadists' smiling faces, the ISIL 'salute' of a 'right-hand index
finger pointing heavenward', and testimonies of happy widows.[174] ISIL has
also attempted to present a more "rational argument" in a series of videos
hosted by the kidnapped journalist John Cantlie. In one video, various current
and former US officials were quoted, such as the then US President Barack
Obama and former CIA Officer Michael Scheuer.[243]

It has encouraged sympathisers to initiate vehicle-ramming and attacks
worldwide.[244]

According to a 2015 study by the Financial Action Task Force, ISIL's five
primary sources of revenue are as follows (listed in order of significance):

Since 2012, ISIL has produced annual reports giving numerical information on
its operations, somewhat in the style of corporate reports, seemingly in a bid
to encourage potential donors.[222][247]

In 2014, the RAND Corporation analysed ISIL's funding sources from documents
captured between 2005 and 2010.[248] It found that outside donations amounted
to only 5% of the group's operating budgets,[248] and that cells inside Iraq
were required to send up to 20% of the income generated from kidnapping,
extortion rackets and other activities to the next level of the group's
leadership, which would then redistribute the funds to provincial or local
cells that were in difficulties or needed money to conduct attacks.[248] In
2016, RAND estimated that ISIL finances from its largest source of income —
oil revenues and the taxes it extracts from people under its control — had
fallen from about $1.9 billion in 2014 to $870 million.[249]

In mid-2014, the Iraqi National Intelligence Service obtained information that
ISIL had assets worth US$2 billion,[250] making it the richest jihadist group
in the world.[251] About three-quarters of this sum was said to looted from
Mosul's central bank and commercial banks in the city.[252][253] However,
doubt was later cast on whether ISIL was able to retrieve anywhere near that
sum from the central bank,[254] and even on whether the looting had actually
occurred.[255]

ISIL attempted to create a modern gold dinar by minting gold, silver, and
copper coins, based on the coinage used by the Umayyad Caliphate in the 7th
century.[256][257][258][259] Despite a propaganda push for the currency,
adoption appeared to have been minimal and its internal economy is effectively
dollarized, even with regards to its own fines.[260]

The group was founded in 1999 by Jordanian Salafi jihadist Abu Musab al-
Zarqawi under the name _Jamāʻat al-Tawḥīd wa-al-Jihād_ (lit. "The Organisation
of Monotheism and Jihad").[50] In a letter published by the Coalition in
February 2004, Zarqawi wrote that jihadis should use bombings to start an open
sectarian war so that Sunnis from the Islamic world would mobilize against
assassinations carried out by Shia, specifically the Badr Brigade, against
Ba'athists and Sunnis.[261]

As a self-proclaimed worldwide caliphate, ISIL claims religious, political and
military authority over all Muslims worldwide,[92] and that "the legality of
all emirates, groups, states, and organisations, becomes null by the expansion
of the khilāfah's [caliphate's] authority and arrival of its troops to their
areas".[145]

In Iraq and Syria, ISIL used many of those countries' existing governorate
boundaries to subdivide territory it conquered and claimed; it called these
divisions wilayah or provinces.[262] By June 2015, ISIL had also established
official "provinces" in Libya, Egypt (Sinai Peninsula), Saudi Arabia, Yemen,
Algeria, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nigeria and the North Caucasus.[263] ISIL
received pledges of allegiance and publish media releases from groups in
countries like Somalia,[264] Bangladesh[265] and the Philippines,[266] but it
has not announced any further official branches, instead identifying new
affiliates as simply "soldiers of the caliphate".[267]

By March 2019, ISIL had lost most of its territory in its former core areas in
Syria and Iraq, and was reduced to a desert pocket as well as insurgent
cells.[268]

Many countries and international bodies have officially designated ISIL as a
terrorist organisation.

The group has attracted widespread criticism internationally for its
extremism, from governments and international bodies such as the United
Nations and Amnesty International. On 24 September 2014, United Nations
Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon stated: "As Muslim leaders around the world have
said, groups like ISIL – or Da'ish – have nothing to do with Islam, and they
certainly do not represent a state. They should more fittingly be called the
'Un-Islamic Non-State'."[269] ISIL has been classified a terrorist
organisation by the United Nations, the European Union and its member states,
the United States, Russia, India, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and many other
countries (see § Classification). Over 60 countries are directly or indirectly
waging war against ISIL (see § Countries and groups at war with ISIL). The
group was described as a cult in a Huffington Post column by notable cult
authority Steven Hassan.[270]

Around the world, Islamic religious leaders have overwhelmingly condemned
ISIL's ideology and actions, arguing that the group has strayed from the path
of true Islam and that its actions do not reflect the religion's real
teachings or virtues.[271]

Extremism within Islam goes back to the 7th century, to the Khawarijes. From
their essentially political position, the Kharijites developed extreme
doctrines which set them apart from both mainstream Sunni and Shia Muslims.
They were particularly noted for adopting a radical approach to takfir,
whereby they declared other Muslims to be unbelievers and therefore deemed
worthy of death.[272][273][274][275] Other scholars have also described the
group not as Sunnis, but as Khawarij.[273][276] Sunni critics, including
Salafi and jihadist muftis such as Adnan al-Aroor and Abu Basir al-Tartusi,
say that ISIL and related terrorist groups are not Sunnis, but are instead
modern-day Kharijites (Muslims who have stepped outside the mainstream of
Islam) serving an imperial anti-Islamic agenda.[277]

ISIL has received severe criticism from Muslim religious scholars and
theologians. In late August 2014, the Grand Mufti of Saudi Arabia, Abdul-Aziz
ibn Abdullah Al ash-Sheikh, condemned ISIL and al-Qaeda saying, "Extremist and
militant ideas and terrorism which spread decay on Earth, destroying human
civilization, are not in any way part of Islam, but are enemy number one of
Islam, and Muslims are their first victims".[278] In late September 2014, 126
Sunni imams and Islamic scholars—primarily Sufi[279]—from around the Muslim
world signed an open letter to the Islamic State's leader al-Baghdadi,
explicitly rejecting and refuting his group's interpretations of Islamic
scriptures, the Quran and hadith, which it used in order to justify its
actions.[280][281] "[You] have misinterpreted Islam into a religion of
harshness, brutality, torture and murder ... this is a great wrong and an
offence to Islam, to Muslims and to the entire world", the letter states.[282]
It rebukes the Islamic State for its killing of prisoners, describing the
killings as "heinous war crimes" and its persecution of the Yazidis of Iraq as
"abominable". Referring to the "self-described 'Islamic State'", the letter
censures the group for carrying out killings and acts of brutality under the
guise of jihad—holy struggle—saying that its "sacrifice" without legitimate
cause, goals and intention "is not jihad at all, but rather, warmongering and
criminality".[282][283] It also accuses the group of instigating
fitna—sedition—by instituting slavery under its rule in contravention of the
anti-slavery consensus of the Islamic scholarly community.[282]

According to _The New York Times_ , "All of the most influential jihadist
theorists are criticising the Islamic State as deviant, calling its self-
proclaimed caliphate null and void" and they have denounced it for its
beheadings of journalists and aid workers.[136] ISIL is widely denounced by a
broad range of Islamic clerics, including al-Qaeda-oriented clerics and Saudi
clerics.[11][136] Muhammad al-Yaqoubi states, "It is enough of a proof of the
extreme ideology of ISIS that the top leaders of Salafi-Jihadism have
disclaimed it."[284] Other critics of ISIL's brand of Sunni Islam include
Salafists who previously publicly supported jihadist groups such as al-Qaeda:
for example, the Saudi government official Saleh Al-Fawzan, known for his
extremist views, who claims that ISIL is a creation of "Zionists, Crusaders
and Safavids", and the Jordanian-Palestinian writer Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi,
the former spiritual mentor to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who was released from
prison in Jordan in June 2014 and accused ISIL of driving a wedge between
Muslims.[277]

The group's declaration of a caliphate has been criticised and its legitimacy
has been disputed by Middle Eastern governments, other jihadist groups,[285]
and by Sunni Muslim theologians and historians. Qatar-based TV broadcaster and
theologian Yusuf al-Qaradawi stated: "[The] declaration issued by the Islamic
State is void under sharia and has dangerous consequences for the Sunnis in
Iraq and for the revolt in Syria", adding that the title of caliph can "only
be given by the entire Muslim nation", not by a single group.[286] The group's
execution of Muslims for breach of traditional _sharia_ law while violating it
itself (encouraging women to emigrate to its territory, travelling without a
_Wali_ —male guardian—and in violation of his wishes) has been
criticised;[287] as has its love of archaic imagery (horsemen and swords)
while engaging in _bid'ah_ (religious innovation) in establishing female
religious police (known as Al-Khansaa Brigade).[288] In a similar vein, the
Syrian Islamic scholar Muhammad al-Yaqoubi says, "[t]he followers of ISIS do
not want to adhere to Islamic law but rather they want to twist Islamic law to
conform to their fantasies. To this end, they pick and choose the evidences
that corroborate their misguidance, despite being weak or abrogated."[289]

Two days after the beheading of Hervé Gourdel, hundreds of Muslims gathered in
the Grand Mosque of Paris to show solidarity against the beheading. The
protest was led by the leader of the French Council of the Muslim Faith, Dalil
Boubakeur, and was joined by thousands of other Muslims around the country
under the slogan "Not in my name".[290][291] French president François
Hollande said Gourdel's beheading was "cowardly" and "cruel", and confirmed
that airstrikes would continue against ISIL in Iraq. Hollande also called for
three days of national mourning, with flags flown at half-mast throughout the
country and said that security would be increased throughout Paris.[290]

An Islamic Front sharia court judge in Aleppo, Mohamed Najeeb Bannan, stated:
"The legal reference is the Islamic Sharia. The cases are different, from
robberies to drug use, to moral crimes. It's our duty to look at any crime
that comes to us... After the regime has fallen, we believe that the Muslim
majority in Syria will ask for an Islamic state. Of course, it's very
important to point out that some say the Islamic Sharia will cut off people's
hands and heads, but it only applies to criminals. And to start off by
killing, crucifying etc. That is not correct at all." In response to being
asked what the difference between the Islamic Front's and ISIL's version of
sharia would be, he said, "One of their mistakes is before the regime has
fallen, and before they've established what in Sharia is called Tamkeen
[having a stable state], they started applying Sharia, thinking God gave them
permission to control the land and establish a Caliphate. This goes against
the beliefs of religious scholars around the world. This is what [IS] did
wrong. This is going to cause a lot of trouble. Anyone who opposes [IS] will
be considered against Sharia and will be severely punished."[292][293]

Al-Qaeda and al-Nusra have been trying to take advantage of ISIL's rise, by
attempting to present themselves as "moderate" compared to "extremist" ISIL,
although it has the same aim of establishing sharia and a caliphate but doing
so in a more gradual manner.[294][295][296][297][298] Al-Nusra has criticised
the way in which ISIL fully and immediately institutes sharia in the areas
that fall under its control, since it alienates people too much. It supports
the gradual, slower approach favoured by al-Qaeda, preparing society to accept
sharia and indoctrinating people through education before implementing the
hudud aspects in sharia, which they believe supports punishments such as
throwing homosexuals from the top of buildings, chopping limbs off, and public
stoning.[147] Al-Nusra and ISIL are both hostile towards the Druze. However,
while al-Nusra has typically destroyed Druze shrines and pressured them to
convert to Sunni Islam, ISIL regards the entire Druze community as a valid
target for violence, as it does the Yazidis.[299]

Ayman al-Zawahiri, the leader of al-Qaeda, has called for consultation (shura)
within the "prophetic method" to be used when establishing the caliphate,
criticising al-Baghdadi for not following the required steps. Al-Zawahiri has
called upon ISIL members to close ranks and join al-Qaeda in fighting against
Assad, the Shia, Russia, Europe, and America and to stop the infighting
between jihadist groups. He called upon jihadists to establish Islamic
entities in Egypt and the Levant, slowly implementing sharia before
establishing a caliphate, and has called for violent assaults against America
and the West.[300]

The Jaysh al-Islam group within the Islamic Front criticised ISIL, saying:
"They killed the people of Islam and leave the idol worshippers ... They use
the verses talking about the disbelievers and implement it on the
Muslims".[301] The main criticism of defectors from ISIL has been that the
group is fighting and killing other Sunni Muslims,[302] as opposed to just
non-Sunnis being brutalised.[303][304] In one case, a supposed defector from
ISIL executed two activists of a Syrian opposition group in Turkey who had
sheltered them.[305]

The current Grand Imam of al-Azhar and former president of al-Azhar
University, Ahmed el-Tayeb, has strongly condemned the Islamic State, stating
that it is acting "under the guise of this holy religion and have given
themselves the name 'Islamic State' in an attempt to export their false
Islam".[306][307] Citing the Quran, he stated: "The punishment for those who
wage war against God and his Prophet and who strive to sow corruption on earth
is death, crucifixion, the severing of hands and feet on opposite sides or
banishment from the land. This is the disgrace for them in this world and in
the hereafter they will receive grievous torment." Although el-Tayeb has been
criticised for not expressly stating that the Islamic State is
heretical,[308][309] the Ash'ari school of Islamic theology, to which el-Tayeb
belongs, does not allow calling a person who follows the shahada an
apostate.[308] El-Tayeb has strongly come out against the practice of
takfirism (declaring a Muslim an apostate) which is used by the Islamic State
to "judge and accuse anyone who doesn't tow their line with apostasy and
outside the realm of the faith" declaring "Jihad on peaceful Muslims" using
"flawed interpretations of some Qur'anic texts, the prophet's Sunna, and the
Imams' views believing incorrectly, that they are leaders of Muslim armies
fighting infidel peoples, in unbelieving lands".[310]

In late December 2015, nearly 70,000 Indian Muslim clerics associated with the
Indian Barelvi movement issued a fatwa condemning ISIL and similar
organisations, saying they are "not Islamic organisations". Approximately 1.5
million Sunni Muslim followers of this movement have formally decried violent
extremists.[311][312][313]

Mehdi Hasan, a political journalist in the UK, said in the _New Statesman_ ,

Whether Sunni or Shia, Salafi or Sufi, conservative or liberal, Muslims – and
Muslim leaders – have almost unanimously condemned and denounced ISIL not
merely as un-Islamic but actively anti-Islamic.[271]

Hassan Hassan, an analyst at the Delma Institute, wrote in _The Guardian_ that
because the Islamic State "bases its teachings on religious texts that
mainstream Muslim clerics do not want to deal with head on, new recruits leave
the camp feeling that they have stumbled on the true message of Islam".[130]
Yusuf al-Qaradawi, an Egyptian Islamic theologian based in Qatar, said in his
official website that the "United Arab Emirates (UAE) and the leaders of Daesh
(ISIS/ISIL) terrorist group are from one species and they are two sides of the
same coin".[314]

Scholar Ian Almond criticised the media commentators, the lack of balance in
reporting, and the "way we are learning to talk about ISIS." While there was
talk about 'radical evil' and 'radical Islam', Almond found it striking
because "some of the most revered and oft-quoted figures in our Western
political tradition have been capable of the most vicious acts of savagery –
and yet all we ever hear about is how much the Middle East has to learn from
us." Almond goes on to cite how Winston Churchill "wanted to gas women and
children", how Ronald Reagan's Central American policies "disembowlled more
children than ISIS," how President Barack Obama's "planes and drones have
dropped bombs on as many schoolchildren as ISIS," how former secretary of
state Madeleine Albright commented on the deaths of Iraqi children killed by
sanctions, how Henry Kissinger and Margaret Thatcher "assisted in the torture
and disappearance of thousands of Chilean students and labour activitists...
For anyone familiar with the history of both U.S. and European torture and
murder over the past 150 years, it might not be all that hyperbolic to say
that in ISIS, what we see more than anything else is a more expansive,
explicit version of our own cruelties. In bombing ISIS and its would-be
imperialism, we are really bombing a version of ourselves."[315]

Author and commentator Tom Engelhardt attributed the rise of ISIL and the
destruction that followed to what he dubbed as America's drive to establish
its own caliphate in the region.[316]

A leader article in the New Scientist magazine contextualised ISIL within the
nation state construct. Although the group is described as medieval in the
pejorative sense, "it is also hyper-modern, interested in few of the trappings
of a conventional state apart from its own brutal brand of law enforcement. In
fact, it is more of a network than a nation, having made canny use of social
media to exert influence far beyond its geographical base."[317]

The United Nations Security Council in its Resolution 1267 (1999) described
Osama bin Laden and his al-Qaeda associates as operators of a network of
terrorist training camps.[352] The UN's Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee first
listed ISIL in its Sanctions List under the name "Al-Qaida in Iraq" on 18
October 2004, as an entity/group associated with al-Qaeda. On 2 June 2014, the
group was added to its listing under the name "Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant". The European Union adopted the UN Sanctions List in 2002.[321]

Many world leaders and government spokespeople have called ISIL a terrorist
group or banned it, without their countries having formally designated it as
such. The following are examples:

The Government of Germany banned ISIL in September 2014. Activities banned
include donations to the group, recruiting fighters, holding ISIL meetings and
distributing its propaganda, flying ISIL flags,[353] wearing ISIL symbols and
all ISIL activities. "The terror organisation Islamic State is a threat to
public safety in Germany as well", said German politician Thomas de Maizière.
He added, "Today's ban is directed solely against terrorists who abuse
religion for their criminal goals."[354] Being a member of ISIL is also
illegal in accordance with § 129a and § 129b of the German criminal code.[355]

In October 2014, Switzerland banned ISIL's activities in the country,
including propaganda and financial support of the fighters, with prison
sentences as potential penalties.[356]

In mid-December 2014, India banned ISIL after the arrest of an operator of a
pro-ISIL Twitter account.[357]

Pakistan designated ISIL as a banned organisation in late August 2015, under
which all elements expressing sympathy for the group would be blacklisted and
sanctioned.[348]

Media sources worldwide have described ISIL as a terrorist
organisation.[77][180][222][193][329][358]

By 2014, ISIL was increasingly being viewed as a militia in addition to a
terrorist group and a cult.[359] As major Iraqi cities fell to ISIL in June
2014, Jessica Lewis, a former US Army intelligence officer at the Institute
for the Study of War, described ISIL at that time as

not a terrorism problem anymore, [but rather] an army on the move in Iraq and
Syria, and they are taking terrain. They have shadow governments in and around
Baghdad, and they have an aspirational goal to govern. I don't know whether
they want to control Baghdad, or if they want to destroy the functions of the
Iraqi state, but either way the outcome will be disastrous for Iraq.[359]

Lewis has called ISIL

an advanced military leadership. They have incredible command and control and
they have a sophisticated reporting mechanism from the field that can relay
tactics and directives up and down the line. They are well-financed, and they
have big sources of manpower, not just the foreign fighters, but also prisoner
escapees.[359]

Former US Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel saw an "imminent threat to every
interest we have", but former top counter-terrorism adviser Daniel Benjamin
derided such talk as a "farce" that panics the public.[360]

Former British Foreign Secretary David Miliband concluded that the 2003
invasion of Iraq caused the creation of ISIL.[361]

Writing for _The Guardian_ , Pankaj Mishra rejects the idea that the group is
a resurgence of medieval Islam, saying instead:

In actuality, Isis is the canniest of all traders in the flourishing
international economy of disaffection: the most resourceful among all those
who offer the security of collective identity to isolated and fearful
individuals. It promises, along with others who retail racial, national and
religious supremacy, to release the anxiety and frustrations of the private
life into the violence of the global.[362]

A certain change of attitude occurred following the inauguration of US
President Trump. On 28 January 2017, he issued a National Security
Presidential Memorandum which called for a comprehensive plan to destroy ISIL
to be formulated by the Defense Department within 30 days.[363]

According to a June 2015 Reuters report that cited "jihadist ideologues" as a
source, 90% of ISIL's fighters in Iraq were Iraqi, and 70% of its fighters in
Syria were Syrian. The article stated that the group had 40,000 fighters and
60,000 supporters across its two primary strongholds in Iraq and Syria.[45]
According to scholar Fawaz Gerges writing in _ISIS: A History_ , some "30
percent of the senior figures" in ISIL's military command were former army and
police officers from the disbanded Iraqi security forces, turned towards Sunni
Islamism and drawn to ISIL by the US De-Ba'athification policy following the
US invasion of Iraq.[174]

According to a poll by Pew Research Center, Muslim populations of various
countries have overwhelmingly negative views of ISIL with Lebanon having the
most unfavorable views.[364][365] In most of these countries, concerns about
Islamic extremism have been growing.[366]

ISIL's claims to territory have brought it into armed conflict with many
governments, militias and other armed groups. International rejection of ISIL
as a terrorist entity and rejection of its claim to even exist have placed it
in conflict with countries around the world.

The Global Coalition to Counter the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
(ISIL), also referred to as the Counter-ISIL Coalition or Counter-DAESH
Coalition,[367] is a US-led group of nations and non-state actors that have
committed to "work together under a common, multifaceted, and long-term
strategy to degrade and defeat ISIL/Daesh". According to a joint statement
issued by 59 national governments and the European Union on 3 December 2014,
participants in the Counter-ISIL Coalition are focused on multiple lines of
effort:[368]

Operation Inherent Resolve is the operational name given by the US to military
operations against ISIL and Syrian al-Qaeda affiliates. Combined Joint Task
Force – Operation Inherent Resolve (CJTF–OIR) is co-ordinating the military
portion of the response. The Arab League, European Union, NATO, and GCC are
part of the Counter-ISIL Coalition:[368] According to the Pentagon, by
December 2017 over 80,000 ISIL fighters had been killed in Iraq and Syria by
CJTF-OIR airstrikes.[100] By then the coalition had flown over 170,000
sorties,[369] 75-80% of combat sorties were conducted by the military of the
United States, with the other 20-25% by Australia, Canada, Denmark, France,
Jordan, Belgium, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, the United Arab
Emirates, and the United Kingdom.[370] According to the UK-based monitoring
group _Airwars_ , the air strikes and artillery of US-led coalition killed as
many as 6,000 civilians in Iraq and Syria by the end of 2017.[371][372]

Lebanon, which the U.S. considers part of the Global Coalition, fought off
several incursions by ISIL, with the largest engagements taking place from
June 2014 to August 2017, when several thousand ISIL fighters invaded from
Syria and occupied Lebanese territory. The U.S. and U.K.-backed Lebanese Army
succeeded in repulsing this invasion, killing or capturing over 1,200 ISIL
fighters in the process.[373][374][375]

Iran[376] – military advisors, training, ground troops, and air power in Iraq
and Syria, beside Iranian borders ( _seeIranian intervention in Iraq_)

Russia[377][378] – arms supplier to Iraqi and Syrian governments. In June
2014, the Iraqi army received Russian Sukhoi Su-25 and Sukhoi Su-30 fighter
aircraft to combat the ISIL.[379] Security operations within state borders in
2015.[380][381] Airstrikes in Syria (see Russian military intervention in the
Syrian Civil War).[382][383][384]

Azerbaijan[385][386] – security operations within state borders

Pakistan – Military deployment over Saudi Arabia-Iraq border. Arresting ISIL
figures in Pakistan.[387][388][389]

Yemen (Supreme Political Council)[390]

Al-Nusra Front is a branch of al-Qaeda operating in Syria. Al-Nusra has
launched many attacks and bombings, mostly against targets affiliated with or
supportive of the Syrian government.[402] There have been media reports that
many of al-Nusra's foreign fighters have left to join al-Baghdadi's ISIL.[403]

In February 2014, after continued tensions, al-Qaeda publicly disavowed any
relations with ISIL.[404] However, ISIL and al-Nusra Front still cooperate
with each other occasionally when they fight against the Syrian
government.[405][406][407]

The two groups [ISIL and al-Nusra] share a nihilistic worldview, a loathing
for modernity, and for the West. They subscribe to the same perverted
interpretations of Islam. Other common traits include a penchant for suicide
attacks, and sophisticated exploitation of the internet and social media. Like
ISIL, several Al Qaeda franchises are interested in taking and holding
territory; AQAP has been much less successful at it. The main differences
between Al Qaeda and ISIL are largely political—and personal. Over the past
decade, Al Qaeda has twice embraced ISIL (and its previous manifestations) as
brothers-in-arms.

On 10 September 2015, an audio message was released by al-Qaeda's leader Ayman
al-Zawahiri criticising ISIL's self-proclaimed caliphate and accusing it of
"sedition". This was described by some media outlets as a "declaration of
war".[409] However, although al-Zawahiri denied ISIL's legitimacy, he
suggested that there was still room for cooperation against common enemies,
and said that if he were in Iraq, he would fight alongside ISIL.[410]

In July 2014, the BBC reported the United Nations' chief investigator as
stating: "Fighters from the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) may be
added to a list of war crimes suspects in Syria."[411] By June 2014, according
to United Nations reports, ISIL had killed hundreds of prisoners of war[412]
and over 1,000 civilians.[ _citation needed_ ]

In November 2014, the UN Commission of Inquiry on Syria said that ISIL was
committing crimes against humanity.[413][414] A report by Human Rights Watch
in November 2014 accused ISIL groups in control of Derna, Libya of war crimes
and human rights abuses and of terrorising residents. Human Rights Watch
documented three apparent summary executions and at least ten public floggings
by the Islamic Youth Shura Council, which joined ISIL in November. It also
documented the beheading of three Derna residents and dozens of seemingly
politically motivated assassinations of judges, public officials, members of
the security forces and others. Sarah Leah Watson, Director of HRW Middle East
and North Africa, said: "Commanders should understand that they may face
domestic or international prosecution for the grave rights abuses their forces
are committing."[415]

Speaking of ISIL's methods, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights has
stated that the group "seeks to subjugate civilians under its control and
dominate every aspect of their lives through terror, indoctrination, and the
provision of services to those who obey".[190]

ISIL compels people in the areas that it controls to live according to its
interpretation of sharia law.[193][416] There have been many reports of the
group's use of death threats, torture and mutilation to compel conversion to
Islam,[193][416] and of clerics being killed for refusal to pledge allegiance
to the so-called "Islamic State".[417] ISIL directs violence against Shia
Muslims, Alawites, Assyrian, Chaldean, Syriac and Armenian Christians,
Yazidis, Druze, Shabaks and Mandeans in particular.[418]

ISIL fighters are targeting Syria's minority Alawite sect.[419][420] The
Islamic State and affiliated jihadist groups reportedly took the lead in an
offensive on Alawite villages in Latakia Governorate of Syria in August
2013.[421][422]

Amnesty International has held ISIL responsible for the ethnic cleansing of
ethnic and religious minority groups in northern Iraq on a "historic scale",
putting entire communities "at risk of being wiped off the map of Iraq". In a
special report released on 2 September 2014, the organization described how
ISIL had "systematically targeted non-Arab and non-Sunni Muslim communities,
killing or abducting hundreds, possibly thousands, of individuals and forcing
more than 830,000 others to flee the areas it has captured since 10 June
2014". Among these people were Assyrian Christians, Turkmen Shia, Shabak Shia,
Kaka'i, Yazidis and Sabean Mandeans, who have lived together for centuries in
Nineveh province, large parts of which have come under ISIL's
control.[88][423]

Among the known killings of religious and minority group civilians carried out
by ISIL are those in the villages and towns of Quiniyeh (70–90 Yazidis
killed), Hardan (60 Yazidis killed), Sinjar (500–2,000 Yazidis killed), Ramadi
Jabal (60–70 Yazidis killed), Dhola (50 Yazidis killed), Khana Sor (100
Yazidis killed), Hardan area (250–300 Yazidis killed), al-Shimal (dozens of
Yazidis killed), Khocho (400 Yazidis killed and 1,000 abducted), Jadala (14
Yazidis killed)[424] and Beshir (700 Shia Turkmen killed),[425] and others
committed near Mosul (670 Shia inmates of the Badush prison killed),[425] and
in Tal Afar prison, Iraq (200 Yazidis killed for refusing conversion).[424]
The UN estimated that 5,000 Yazidis were killed by ISIL during the takeover of
parts of northern Iraq in August 2014.[426] In late May 2014, 150 Kurdish boys
from Kobani aged 14–16 were abducted and subjected to torture and abuse,
according to Human Rights Watch.[427] In the Syrian towns of Ghraneij, Abu
Haman and Kashkiyeh 700 members of the Sunni Al-Shaitat tribe were killed for
attempting an uprising against ISIL control.[428][429] The UN reported that in
June 2014 ISIL had killed a number of Sunni Islamic clerics who refused to
pledge allegiance to it.[417]

Christians living in areas under ISIL control face four options: converting to
Islam, paying a religious levy called the jizya, leaving the "Caliphate", or
death.[430][431] "We offer them three choices: Islam; the dhimma contract –
involving payment of jizya; if they refuse this they will have nothing but the
sword", ISIL said.[432][433] ISIL leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi further noted
that Christians who do not agree with those terms must "leave the borders of
the Islamic Caliphate" within a specified deadline.[432][433] ISIL had already
set similar rules for Christians in Raqqa, once one of Syria's more liberal
cities.[434][435] However, on 29 March 2016, ISIL issued a decree preventing
Christians and Armenians from leaving Raqqa.[436]

On 23 February 2015, in response to a major Kurdish offensive in the Al-
Hasakah Governorate, ISIL abducted 150 Assyrian Christians from villages near
Tal Tamr (Tell Tamer) in northeastern Syria, after launching a large offensive
in the region.[437][438]

Kurdish officials have claimed that ISIL's campaign against Kurdish and Yezidi
enclaves, such as Sinjar, are part of an organised Arabization plan.[439]

According to Iraqi security officials, Islamic State militants targeted a
football ground, built near a Shiite shrine in the city of Kirkuk. They shot
mortar rounds that killed six civilians and injured nine others, on August 24,
2019. In another attack day before, a bike equipped with explosives blasted
near a mosque in Shia-majority area of Mussayyib, killing three people and
wounding 34.[440]

During the Iraqi conflict in 2014, ISIL released dozens of videos showing its
ill treatment of civilians, many of whom had apparently been targeted on the
basis of their religion or ethnicity. Navi Pillay, UN High Commissioner for
Human Rights, warned of war crimes being committed in the Iraqi war zone, and
disclosed a UN report of ISIL militants murdering Iraqi Army soldiers and 17
civilians in a single street in Mosul. The UN reported that in the 17 days
from 5 to 22 June, ISIL killed more than 1,000 Iraqi civilians and injured
more than 1,000.[441][442][443] After ISIL released photographs of its
fighters shooting scores of young men, the UN declared that cold-blooded
"executions" by militants in northern Iraq almost certainly amounted to war
crimes.[444]

ISIL's advance in Iraq in mid-2014 was accompanied by continuing violence in
Syria. On 29 May, ISIL raided a village in Syria and at least 15 civilians
were killed, including, according to Human Rights Watch, at least six
children.[445] A hospital in the area confirmed that it had received 15 bodies
on the same day.[446] The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights reported that on
1 June, a 102-year-old man was killed along with his whole family in a village
in Hama province.[447] According to Reuters, 1,878 people were killed in Syria
by ISIL during the last six months of 2014, most of them civilians.[448]

During its occupation of Mosul, ISIL implemented a sharia school curriculum
which banned the teaching of art, music, national history, literature and
Christianity. Although Charles Darwin's theory of evolution has never been
taught in Iraqi schools, that subject was also banned from the school
curriculum. Patriotic songs were declared blasphemous, and orders were given
to remove certain pictures from school textbooks.[449][450][451][452] Iraqi
parents largely boycotted schools in which the new curriculum was
introduced.[453]

After capturing cities in Iraq, ISIL issued guidelines on how to wear clothes
and veils. ISIL warned women in the city of Mosul to wear full-face veils or
face severe punishment.[454] A cleric told Reuters in Mosul that ISIL gunmen
had ordered him to read out the warning in his mosque when worshippers
gathered. ISIL ordered the faces of both male and female mannequins to be
covered, in an order which also banned the use of naked mannequins.[455] In
Raqqa the group used its two battalions of female fighters in the city to
enforce compliance by women with its strict laws on individual conduct.[456]

ISIL released 16 notes labelled "Contract of the City", a set of rules aimed
at civilians in Nineveh. One rule stipulated that women should stay at home
and not go outside unless necessary. Another rule said that stealing would be
punished by amputation.[457][458] In addition to banning the sale and use of
alcohol, ISIL banned the sale and use of cigarettes and hookah pipes. It also
banned "music and songs in cars, at parties, in shops and in public, as well
as photographs of people in shop windows".[459]

According to _The Economist_ , the group also adopted certain practices seen
in Saudi Arabia, including the establishment of religious police to root out
"vice" and enforce attendance at daily prayers, the widespread use of capital
punishment, and the destruction of Christian churches and non-Sunni mosques or
their conversion to other uses.[137]

ISIL carried out executions on both men and women who were accused of various
acts and found guilty of crimes against Islam such as sodomy,[460] adultery,
usage and possession of contraband, rape, blasphemy, witchcraft,[461]
renouncing Islam and murder. Before the accused are executed their charges are
read to them and the spectators. Executions take various forms, including
stoning to death, crucifixions, beheadings, burning people alive, and throwing
people from tall buildings.[462][463][464][465] The Islamic State in Iraq
frequently carried out mass executions in Mosul and Hawija.

The Islamic State militants were accused of using civilian residents of towns
as human shields.[466] The _Telegraph_ reported that "Extremist fighters are
deliberately hiding among civilian buildings and residents to try to prevent
strikes."[467][468] Civil rights activist told ARA News that "ISIS militants
prevent the people of Manbij and Jarablus from leaving their hometowns despite
the fierce airstrikes by Russian warplanes".[469] The use of human shields and
executions of civilians who tried to flee continued in Iraq right through
until the group lost is final major urban territory there after its defeat in
the Battle for Mosul in July 2017.[470]

In August 2019, the terror group claimed responsibility of the suicide bomb
attack in a crowded wedding hall in Kabul. It marked one of the most
devastating attacks on civilians in years of conflict and terror, where nearly
63 people died and more than 180 were wounded.[471]

According to a report by the magazine _Foreign Policy_ , children as young as
six are recruited or kidnapped and sent to military and religious training
camps, where they practice beheading with dolls and are indoctrinated with the
religious views of ISIL.[472] Children are used as human shields on front
lines and to provide blood transfusions for Islamic State soldiers,[472]
according to Shelly Whitman of the Roméo Dallaire Child Soldiers Initiative.
The second instalment of a Vice News documentary about ISIL focused on how the
group is specifically grooming children for the future. A spokesman told VICE
News that those under the age of 15 go to sharia camp to learn about religion,
while those older than 16 can go to military training camp.[472] Children are
also used for propaganda. According to a UN report, "In mid-August, ISIL
entered a cancer hospital in Mosul, forced at least two sick children to hold
the ISIL flag and posted the pictures on the internet." Misty Buswell, a Save
the Children representative working with refugees in Jordan, said, "It's not
an exaggeration to say we could lose a whole generation of children to
trauma."[473] A UN report indicated that at least 89 children, mostly from the
ages of 12 to 16 had been killed fighting for the Islamic State in 2015, 39%
of which died in suicide bombing attacks.[474] Der Spiegel estimated in 2016
that 1,500 boys were serving as child soldiers for ISIL.[472] It was reported
that on 12 March 2017, ISIL used 6 child suicide bombers against the Syrian
Army soldiers besieged in Deir ez-Zor.[475]

Sexual violence perpetrated by ISIL includes using rape as a weapon of
war;[476] instituting forced marriages to its fighters;[477] and trading women
and girls as sex slaves.[478]

There are many reports of sexual abuse and enslavement in ISIL-controlled
areas of women and girls, predominantly from the minority Christian and Yazidi
communities.[479][480] Fighters are told that they are free to have sex with
or rape non-Muslim captive women.[481] Haleh Esfandiari from the Woodrow
Wilson International Center for Scholars has highlighted the abuse of local
women by ISIL militants after they have captured an area. "They usually take
the older women to a makeshift slave market and try to sell them. The younger
girls ... are raped or married off to fighters", she said, adding, "It's based
on temporary marriages, and once these fighters have had sex with these young
girls, they just pass them on to other fighters."[482]

The capture of Iraqi cities by the group in June 2014 was accompanied by an
upsurge in crimes against women, including kidnap and rape.[483][484][485]
According to Martin Williams in _The Citizen_ , some hard-line Salafists
apparently regard extramarital sex with multiple partners as a legitimate form
of holy war and it is "difficult to reconcile this with a religion where some
adherents insist that women must be covered from head to toe, with only a
narrow slit for the eyes".[486]

As of August 2015[update], the trade in sex slaves appeared to remain
restricted to Yazidi women and girls.[478] It has reportedly become a
recruiting technique to attract men from conservative Muslim societies, where
dating and casual sex are not allowed.[478] Nazand Begikhani said of the
Yazidi victims, "These women have been treated like cattle ... They have been
subjected to physical and sexual violence, including systematic rape and sex
slavery. They've been exposed in markets in Mosul and in Raqqa, Syria,
carrying price tags."[487] According to UN Reports the price list for IS sex
slaves range from 40 to 160 US dollars. The younger the slave the more
expensive. Girls and boys between the age 1–9 are referred to as the most
expensive, with the cheapest being women between 40 and 50 years old.[488]
According to another source the price of a slave equals the price of an
AK-47.[489]

A United Nations report issued on 2 October 2014, based on 500 interviews with
witnesses, said that ISIL took 450–500 women and girls to Iraq's Nineveh
region in August, where "150 unmarried girls and women, predominantly from the
Yazidi and Christian communities, were reportedly transported to Syria, either
to be given to ISIL fighters as a reward or to be sold as sex slaves".[480] In
mid-October, the UN confirmed that 5,000–7,000 Yazidi women and children had
been abducted by ISIL and sold into slavery.[426][490] In November 2014 _The
New York Times_ reported on the accounts given by five who escaped ISIL of
their captivity and abuse.[491] In December 2014, the Iraqi Ministry of Human
Rights announced that ISIL had killed over 150 women and girls in Fallujah who
refused to participate in sexual jihad.[492] Non-Muslim women have reportedly
been married off to fighters against their will. ISIL claims the women provide
the new converts and children necessary to spread ISIL's control.[493]

Shortly after the death of US hostage Kayla Mueller was confirmed on 10
February 2015,[494] several media outlets reported that the US intelligence
community believed she may have been given as a wife to an ISIL
fighter.[495][496][497] In August 2015 it was confirmed that she had been
forced into marriage[498] to Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who raped her
repeatedly.[499][498][500] The Mueller family was informed by the US Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) that Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi had sexually abused
Ms. Mueller, and that Ms. Mueller had also been tortured.[500] Abu Sayyaf's
widow, Umm Sayyaf, confirmed that it was her husband who had been Mueller's
primary abuser.[501]

In its digital magazine _Dabiq_ , ISIL explicitly claimed religious
justification for enslaving Yazidi women.[502][503][504] According to _The
Wall Street Journal_ , ISIL appeals to apocalyptic beliefs and claims
"justification by a Hadith that they interpret as portraying the revival of
slavery as a precursor to the end of the world".[505] ISIL appeals to the
hadith and Quran when claiming the right to enslave and rape captive non-
Muslim women.[502][506][507] According to _Dabiq,_ "enslaving the families of
the kuffar and taking their women as concubines is a firmly established aspect
of the Sharia's that if one were to deny or mock, he would be denying or
mocking the verses of the Quran and the narration of the Prophet ... and
thereby apostatizing from Islam." Captured Yazidi women and children are
divided among the fighters who captured them, with one-fifth taken as a
tax.[507][508] ISIL has received widespread criticism from Muslim scholars and
others in the Muslim world for using part of the Quran to derive a ruling in
isolation, rather than considering the entire Quran and hadith.[502][506][507]
According to Mona Siddiqui, ISIL's "narrative may well be wrapped up in the
familiar language of jihad and 'fighting in the cause of Allah', but it
amounts to little more than destruction of anything and anyone who doesn't
agree with them"; she describes ISIL as reflecting a "lethal mix of violence
and sexual power" and a "deeply flawed view of manhood".[493] _Dabiq_
describes "this large-scale enslavement" of non-Muslims as "probably the first
since the abandonment of Shariah law".[507][508]

In late 2014, ISIL released a pamphlet that focused on the treatment of female
slaves.[509][510] It claims that the Quran allows fighters to have sex with
captives, including adolescent girls, and to beat slaves as discipline. The
pamphlet's guidelines also allow fighters to trade slaves, including for sex,
as long as they have not been impregnated by their owners.[509][510][511]
Charlie Winter, a researcher at the counter-extremist think tank Quilliam,
described the pamphlet as "abhorrent".[511][512] In response to this document
Abbas Barzegar, a religion professor at Georgia State University, said Muslims
around the world find ISIL's "alien interpretation of Islam grotesque and
abhorrent".[513] Muslim leaders and scholars from around the world have
rejected the validity of ISIL's claims, claiming that the reintroduction of
slavery is un-Islamic, that they are required to protect "People of the
Scripture" including Christians, Jews, Muslims and Yazidis, and that ISIL's
fatwas are invalid due to their lack of religious authority and the fatwas'
inconsistency with Islam.[282][280]

_The Independent_ reported in 2015 that the usage of Yazidi sex slaves had
created ongoing friction among fighters within ISIL. Sajad Jiyad, a Research
Fellow and Associate Member at the Iraqi Institute for Economic Reform, told
the newspaper that many ISIL supporters and fighters had been in denial about
the trafficking of kidnapped Yazidi women until a _Dabiq_ article justifying
the practice was published.[514][515] _The New York Times_ said in August 2015
that "[t]he systematic rape of women and girls from the Yazidi religious
minority has become deeply enmeshed in the organization and the radical
theology of the Islamic State in the year since the group announced it was
reviving slavery as an institution."[478] The article claims that ISIL is not
merely exonerating but sacralising rape, and illustrated this with the
testimony of escapees. One 15-year-old victim said that, while she was being
assaulted, her rapist "kept telling me this is ibadah"; a 12-year-old victim
related how her assailant claimed that, "by raping me, he is drawing closer to
God";[478] and one adult prisoner told how, when she challenged her captor
about repeatedly raping a 12 year old, she was met with the retort, "No, she's
not a little girl, she's a slave and she knows exactly how to have sex and
having sex with her pleases God."[478]

In July 2016 it was reported by an AP investigation that ISIL was using mobile
apps like Telegram to sell their sex slaves and identify the slaves of other
ISIL members at checkpoints.[516] In 2016, the Commission for International
Justice and Accountability said they had identified 34 senior ISIL members who
were instrumental in the systematic sex slave trade and planned to prosecute
them after the end of hostilities.[517]

The Committee to Protect Journalists states: "Without a free press, few other
human rights are attainable."[518] ISIL has tortured and murdered local
journalists,[519][520] creating what Reporters Without Borders calls "news
blackholes" in areas controlled by ISIL. ISIL fighters have reportedly been
given written directions to kill or capture journalists.[521]

In December 2013, two suicide bombers stormed the headquarters of TV station
Salaheddin and killed five journalists, after accusing the station of
"distorting the image of Iraq's Sunni community". Reporters Without Borders
reported that on 7 September 2014, ISIL seized and on 11 October publicly
beheaded Raad al-Azzawi, a TV Salaheddin cameraman from the village of Samra,
east of Tikrit.[522] As of October 2014[update], according to the Journalistic
Freedoms Observatory, ISIL is holding nine journalists and has nine others
under close observation in Mosul and Salahuddin province.[521]

During 2013 and part of 2014, an ISIL unit nicknamed the Beatles acquired and
held 12 Western journalists hostage, along with aid workers and other foreign
hostages, totalling 23 or 24 known hostages. A Polish journalist Marcin Suder
was captured in July 2013 but escaped four months later.[523] The unit
executed American journalists James Foley and Steven Sotloff and released
beheading videos. Eight of the other journalists were released for ransom:
Danish journalist Daniel Rye Ottosen, French journalists Didier François,
Edouard Elias, Nicolas Hénin, and Pierre Torres, and Spanish journalists Marc
Marginedas, Javier Espinosa, and Ricardo García Vilanova. The unit continues
to hold hostage British journalist John Cantlie and a female aid worker.[524]

Cyber-security group the Citizen Lab released a report finding a possible link
between ISIL and a digital attack on the Syrian citizen media group Raqqa Is
Being Slaughtered Silently (RSS). Supporters of the media group received an
emailed link to an image of supposed airstrikes, but clicking on the link
introduced malware to the user's computer that sends details of the user's IP
address and system each time it restarts. That information has been enough to
allow ISIL to locate RSS supporters. "The group has been targeted for
kidnappings, house raids, and at least one alleged targeted killing. At the
time of that writing, ISIL was allegedly holding several citizen journalists
in Raqqa", according to the Citizen Lab report.[525]

On 8 January 2015, ISIL members in Libya claimed to have executed Tunisian
journalists Sofiene Chourabi and Nadhir Ktari who disappeared in September
2014.[526] Also in January 2015, Japanese journalist Kenji Goto was kidnapped
and beheaded, after a demand for a $200 million ransom payment was not
met.[527]

An unknown number of Syrians and Iraqis, several Lebanese soldiers, male and
female Kurdish fighters near Kobanî, two American journalists, one American
and two British aid workers, 30 Ethiopian Christians[528] and 21 Egyptian
Coptic Christians in Libya[529] have been beheaded by the Islamic State of
Iraq and the Levant. ISIL uses beheadings to intimidate local populations and
has released a series of propaganda videos aimed at Western countries.[86]
ISIL was reported to have beheaded about 100 foreign fighters as deserters who
tried to leave Raqqa.[530]

They also engage in public and mass executions of Syrian and Iraqi soldiers
and civilians,[419] sometimes forcing prisoners to dig their own graves before
shooting lines of prisoners and pushing them in.[531][532] Among the known
mass executions of captured soldiers carried out by ISIL are those in Tikrit
(ISIS executed up to 1,700 Shia Iraqi Air Force cadets from Camp Speicher near
Tikrit on 12 June 2014),[533][534] Al-Thawrah (ISIS executed 250 Syrian
soldiers captured at the Al-Tabqa air base between 27 and 28 August
2014),[535] Palmyra (up to 280 Syrian soldiers and government loyalists were
shot in the head or beheaded in a public square on 22 May 2015),[536] and Deir
ez-Zor (ISIS killed at least 300 Syrian soldiers, pro-government militiamen
and their families on 16 January 2016).[537]

ISIL executed 600 Shia prisoners in Mosul in June 2014.[538] In November 2014,
there were reports that ISIL fighters massacred more than 630 members of the
Albu Nimr tribe in Iraq. Albu Nimr was one of the Sunni Arab tribes that
fiercely opposed ISIL.[539] On 17 December 2014, it was reported by Turkish
medi, that ISIL had executed at least 150 women from the Albu Nimr tribe in
Falluja for refusing to marry ISIL militants.[540]

The Islamic State began a program in 2014 to make chemical weapons using both
chlorine and a World War I-era toxin known as sulfur mustard. [541] Kurds in
northern Iraq reported being attacked by ISIL with chemical weapons in August
2015,[542] which was later confirmed to be mustard gas.[543] At Kobanî, it is
highly likely that ISIL used chlorine gas. These chemical weapons may have
been from a chemical weapons storage site at Al-Muthanna, which contained
2,500 chemical rockets. Although the rockets' chemical contents were
deteriorated, ISIL may have used them in a concentrated manner.[544]

UNESCO's Director-General Irina Bokova has warned that ISIL is destroying
Iraq's cultural heritage, in what she has called "cultural cleansing". "We
don't have time to lose because extremists are trying to erase the identity,
because they know that if there is no identity, there is no memory, there is
no history", she said. Referring to the ancient cultures of Christians,
Yazidis and other minorities, she said, "This is a way to destroy identity.
You deprive them of their culture, you deprive them of their history, their
heritage, and that is why it goes hand in hand with genocide. Along with the
physical persecution they want to eliminate – to delete – the memory of these
different cultures ... we think this is appalling, and this is not
acceptable."[545] Saad Eskander, head of Iraq's National Archives said, "For
the first time you have cultural cleansing... For the Yazidis, religion is
oral, nothing is written. By destroying their places of worship... you are
killing cultural memory. It is the same with the Christians – it really is a
threat beyond belief."[546]

To finance its activities, ISIL is stealing artefacts from Syria[547] and Iraq
and sending them to Europe to be sold. UNESCO has asked for United Nations
Security Council controls on the sale of antiquities, similar to those imposed
after the 2003 Iraq War. UNESCO is working with Interpol, national customs
authorities, museums, and major auction houses in attempts to prevent looted
items from being sold.[546] ISIL occupied Mosul Museum, the second most
important museum in Iraq, as it was about to reopen after years of rebuilding
following the Iraq War, saying that the statues were against Islam and
threatening to destroy the museum's contents.[548][549]

ISIL considers worshipping at graves tantamount to idolatry, and seeks to
purify the community of unbelievers. It has used bulldozers to crush buildings
and archaeological sites.[549] Bernard Haykel has described al-Baghdadi's
creed as "a kind of untamed Wahhabism", saying, "For Al Qaeda, violence is a
means to an ends [ _sic_ ]; for ISIS, it is an end in itself".[136] The
destruction by ISIL in July 2014 of the tomb and shrine of the prophet Yunus –
Jonah in Christianity – the 13th-century mosque of Imam Yahya Abu al-Qassimin,
the 14th-century shrine of prophet Jerjis – St George to Christians – and the
attempted destruction of the Hadba minaret at the 12th-century Great Mosque of
Al-Nuri have been described as "an unchecked outburst of extreme Wahhabism".[
_citation needed_ ] "There were explosions that destroyed buildings dating
back to the Assyrian era", said National Museum of Iraq director Qais Rashid,
referring to the destruction of the shrine of Yunus. He cited another case
where "Daesh (ISIL) gathered over 1,500 manuscripts from convents and other
holy places and burnt all of them in the middle of the city square".[550] In
March 2015, ISIL reportedly bulldozed the 13th-century BC Assyrian city of
Nimrud, believing its sculptures to be idolatrous. UNESCO head, Irina Bokova,
deemed this to be a war crime.[551]

ISIL has burned or stolen collections of books and papers from the various
locations including the Central Library of Mosul (which they rigged with
explosives and burned down),[552] the library at the University of Mosul, a
Sunni Muslim library, a 265-year-old Latin Church and Monastery of the
Dominican Fathers, and the Mosul Museum Library. Some destroyed or stolen
works date back to 5000 BCE and include "Iraq newspapers dating to the early
20th century, maps and books from the Ottoman Empire, and book collections
contributed by about 100 of Mosul's establishment families." The stated goal
is to destroy all non-Islamic books.

  *[lit.]: literal translation

