In typography, **italic type** is a cursive font based on a stylised form of
calligraphic handwriting.[1][2] Owing to the influence from calligraphy,
italics normally slant slightly to the right. Italics are a way to emphasise
key points in a printed text, to identify many types of creative works, or,
when quoting a speaker, a way to show which words they stressed. One manual of
English usage described italics as "the print equivalent of underlining".[3]

The name comes from the fact that calligraphy-inspired typefaces were first
designed in Italy, to replace documents traditionally written in a handwriting
style called chancery hand. Aldus Manutius and Ludovico Arrighi (both between
the 15th and 16th centuries) were the main type designers involved in this
process at the time. Different glyph shapes from Roman type are usually used –
another influence from calligraphy – and upper-case letters may have swashes,
flourishes inspired by ornate calligraphy. An alternative is oblique type, in
which the type is slanted but the letterforms do not change shape: this less
elaborate approach is used by many sans-serif typefaces.

Italic type was first used by Aldus Manutius and his press in Venice in
1500.[6]

Manutius intended his italic type to be used not for emphasis but for the text
of small, easily carried editions of popular books (often poetry), replicating
the style of handwritten manuscripts of the period. The choice of using italic
type, rather than the roman type in general use at the time, was apparently
made to suggest informality in editions designed for leisure reading.[a]
Manutius' italic type was cut by his punchcutter Francesco Griffo (who later
following a dispute with Manutius claimed to have conceived it). It replicated
handwriting of the period following from the style of Niccolò de' Niccoli,
possibly even Manutius' own.[7][8]

The first use in a complete volume was a 1501 edition of Virgil dedicated to
Italy, although it had been briefly used in the frontispiece of a 1500 edition
of Catherine of Siena's letters.[9] In 1501, Aldus wrote to his friend Scipio:

We have printed, and are now publishing, the Satires of Juvenal and Persius in
a very small format, so that they may more conveniently be held in the hand
and learned by heart (not to speak of being read) by everyone.

Manutius' italic was different in some ways from modern italics, being
conceived for the specific use of replicating the layout of contemporary
calligraphers like Pomponio Leto and Bartolomeo Sanvito. The capital letters
were upright capitals on the model of Roman square capitals, shorter than the
ascending lower-case italic letters, and were used at the start of each line
followed by a clear space before the first lower-case letter.[10] While modern
italics are often more condensed than roman types, historian Harry Carter
describes Manutius' italic as about the same width as roman type.[11] To
replicate handwriting, Griffo cut at least sixty-five tied letters (ligatures)
in the Aldine Dante and Virgil of 1501.[10] Italic typefaces of the following
century used varying but reduced numbers of ligatures.[10]

Italic type rapidly became very popular and was widely (and inaccurately)
imitated. The Venetian Senate gave Aldus exclusive right to its use, a patent
confirmed by three successive Popes, but it was widely counterfeited as early
as 1502.[12] Griffo, who had left Venice in a business dispute, cut a version
for printer Girolamo Soncino, and other copies appeared in Italy and in Lyons.
The Italians called the character Aldino, while others called it Italic.
Italics spread rapidly; historian Hendrik Vervliet dates the first production
of italics in Paris to 1512.[6][10] Some printers of Northern Europe used
home-made supplements to add characters not used in Italian, or mated it to
alternative capitals, including Gothic ones.[6][10]

Besides imitations of Griffo's italic and its derivatives, a second wave
appeared of "chancery" italics, most popular in Italy, which Vervliet
describes as being based on "a more deliberate and formal handwriting [with]
longer ascenders and descenders, sometimes with curved or bulbous terminals,
and [often] only available in the bigger sizes."[6][13][14] Chancery italics
were introduced around 1524 by Arrighi, a calligrapher and author of a
calligraphy textbook who began a career as a printer in Rome, and also by
Giovanni Antonio Tagliente of Venice, with imitations rapidly appearing in
France by 1528.[11] Chancery italics faded as a style over the course of the
sixteenth century, although revivals were made beginning in the twentieth
century.[b] Chancery italics may have backward-pointing serifs or round
terminals pointing forwards on the ascenders.[13]

Italic capitals with a slope were introduced in the sixteenth century. The
first printer known to have used them was Johann or Johannes Singriener in
Vienna in 1524, and the practice spread to Germany, France and Belgium.[6][21]
Particularly influential in the switch to sloped capitals as a general
practice was Robert Granjon, a prolific and extremely precise French
punchcutter particularly renowned for his skill in cutting italics.[6]
Vervliet comments that among punchcutters in France "the main name associated
with the change is Granjon's."[6]

The evolution of use of italic to show emphasis happened in the sixteenth
century and was a clear norm by the seventeenth. The trend of presenting types
as matching in typefounders' specimens developed also over this period.[22]
Italics developed stylistically over the following centuries, tracking
changing tastes in calligraphy and type design.[23][24][25] One major
development that slowly became popular from the end of the seventeenth century
was a switch to an open form _h_ matching the _n_ , a development seen in the
_Romain du roi_ type of the 1690s, replacing the folded, closed-form _h_ of
sixteenth- and seventeenth-century italics, and sometimes simplification of
the entrance stroke.[26][27]

Here is an example of _normal (roman)_ and _true italics_ text:

Here is the same text as _oblique_ text:

True italic styles are traditionally somewhat narrower than roman fonts. Below
are some examples, besides the slant, of other possible differences between
roman and italic type that vary according to how the types are designed. Here
are the illustrated transformations from roman to italic:

a "round" or one-storey _a_ ,

an _e_ whose bowl is curved rather than pointed,

an _f_ with a tail (known as a descender),

a _k_ with a looped bowl, a _k_ with a ball terminal,

a _p_ with an intersection at the stem (ascender),

a _v_ and _w_ with swashes and curved bottoms,

a _z_ with the stress on the horizontal strokes as opposed to the diagonal
vertical one.

None of these differences are required in an italic; some, like the "p"
variant, do not show up in the majority of italic fonts, while others, like
the "a" and "f" variants, are in almost every italic. Other common differences
include:

Less common differences include a descender on the _z_ and a ball on the
finishing stroke of an _h_ , which curves back to resemble a _b_ somewhat.
Sometimes the _w_ is of a form taken from old German typefaces, in which the
left half is of the same form as the _n_ and the right half is of the same
form as the _v_ in the same typeface. There also exist specialised ligatures
for italics, such as when _sp_ is formed by a curl atop the _s_ that reaches
the small ascender at the top of the _p_.

In addition to these differences in shape of letters, italic lowercases
usually lack serifs at the bottoms of strokes, since a pen would bounce up to
continue the action of writing. Instead they usually have one-sided serifs
that curve up on the outstroke (contrast the flat two-sided serifs of a roman
font). One uncommon exception to this is Hermann Zapf's Melior. (Its outstroke
serifs are one-sided, but they don't curve up.)

Outside the regular alphabet, there are other italic types for symbols:

Oblique type (or slanted roman, sloped roman) is type that is slanted, but
lacking cursive letterforms, with features like a non-descending _f_ and
double-storey _a_ , unlike "true italics". Many sans-serif typefaces use
oblique designs (sometimes called "sloped roman" styles) instead of italic
ones; some have both italic and oblique variants. Type designers have
described oblique type as less organic and calligraphic than italics, which in
some situations may be preferred.[39] Contemporary type designer Jeremy
Tankard stated that he had avoided a true italic 'a' and 'e' in his sans-serif
Bliss due to finding them "too soft", while Hoefler and Frere-Jones have
described obliques as more "keen and insistent" than true italics.[40][41]
Adrian Frutiger has described obliques as more appropriate to the aesthetic of
sans-serifs than italics.[42] In contrast, Martin Majoor has argued that
obliques do not contrast enough from the regular style.[43]

Almost all modern serif fonts have true italic designs. In the late nineteenth
and early twentieth centuries, a number of type foundries such as American
Type Founders and Genzsch & Heyse offered serif typefaces with oblique rather
than italic designs, especially display typefaces but these designs (such as
Genzsch Antiqua) have mostly disappeared.[44][45][46] An exception is American
Type Founders' Bookman, offered in some releases with the oblique of its metal
type version.[47] An unusual example of an oblique font from the inter-war
period is the display face Koch Antiqua. With a partly-oblique lower case, it
also makes the italic capitals inline in the style of blackletter capitals in
the larger sizes of the metal type. It was developed by Rudolph Koch, a type
designer who had previously specialised in to blackletter font design (which
does not use italics); Walter Tracy described his design as "uninhibited by
the traditions of roman and italic".[48]

The printing historian and artistic director Stanley Morison was for a time in
the inter-war period interested in the oblique type style, which he felt stood
out in text less than a true italic and should supersede it. He argued in his
article _Towards an Ideal Italic_ that serif book typefaces should have as the
default sloped form an oblique and as a complement a script typeface where a
more decorative form was preferred.[49] He made an attempt to promote the idea
by commissioning the typeface Perpetua from Eric Gill with a sloped roman
rather than an italic, but came to find the style unattractive; Perpetua's
italic when finally issued had the conventional italic 'a', 'e' and
'f'.[50][51] Morison wrote to his friend, type designer Jan van Krimpen, that
in developing Perpetua's italic "we did not give enough slope to it. When we
added more slope, it seemed that the font required a little more cursive to
it."[44][c] A few other type designers replicated his approach for a time: van
Krimpen's Romulus and William Addison Dwiggins' Electra were both released
with obliques.[d] Morison's Times New Roman typeface has a very traditional
true italic in the style of the late eighteenth century, which he later wryly
commented owed "more to Didot than dogma".[54]

Some serif designs primarily intended for headings rather than body text are
not provided with an italic, Engravers and some releases of Cooper Black and
Baskerville Old Style being common examples of this. In addition, computer
programmes may generate an 'italic' style by simply slanting the regular style
if they cannot find an italic or oblique style, though this may look awkward
with serif fonts for which an italic is expected. Professional designers
normally do not simply tilt fonts to generate obliques but make subtle
corrections to correct the distorted curves this introduces. Many sans-serif
families have oblique fonts labelled as italic, whether or not they include
"true italic" characteristics.

If something within a run of italics needs to be italicised itself, the type
is normally switched back to non-italicized (roman) type: " _I think_ The
Scarlet Letter _had a chapter about that_ , thought Mary." In this example,
the title (" _The Scarlet Letter_ ") is within an italicised thought process
and therefore this title is non-italicised. It is followed by the main
narrative that is outside both. It is also non-italicised and therefore not
obviously separated from the former. The reader must find additional criteria
to distinguish between these. Here, apart from using the attribute of
italic–non-italic styles, the title also employs the attribute of
capitalization. Citation styles in which book titles are italicised differ on
how to deal with a book title within a book title; for example, MLA style
specifies a switch back to roman type, whereas _The Chicago Manual of Style_
(8.184) specifies the use of quotation marks ( _A Key to Whitehead's "Process
and Reality"_). An alternative option is to switch to an 'upright italic'
style if the typeface used has one; this is discussed below.

Left-leaning italics are very rare in Latin alphabet use, where their use is
mostly restricted to occasional use where an attention-grabbing effect is
sought.[55][56] They are more common in Arabic printing.

In certain Arabic fonts (e.g.: Adobe Arabic, Boutros Ads), the italic font has
the top of the letter leaning to the left, instead of leaning to the right.
Some font families, such as Venus, Roemisch, Topografische Zahlentafel,
include left leaning fonts and letters designed for German cartographic map
production, even though they do not support Arabic characters.[57]

In the 1950s, Gholamhossein Mosahab invented the _Iranic font style_ , a back-
slanted italic form to go with the right-to-left direction of the script.[58]

Since italic styles clearly look different from regular (roman) styles, it is
possible to have 'upright italic' designs that have a cursive style but remain
upright. In Latin-script countries, upright italics are rare but are sometimes
used in mathematics or in complex texts where a section of text already in
italics needs a 'double italic' style to add emphasis to it. Donald Knuth's
Computer Modern has an alternate upright italic as an alternative to its
standard italic, since its intended use is complex mathematics typesetting.

Font families with an upright or near-upright italic only include Jan van
Krimpen's Romanée, Eric Gill's Joanna, Martin Majoor's FF Seria and Frederic
Goudy's Deepdene. The popular book typeface Bembo has been sold with two
italics: one reasonably straightforward design that is commonly used today,
and an alternative upright 'Condensed Italic' design, far more calligraphic,
as a more eccentric alternative. This italic face was designed by Alfred
Fairbank and named "Bembo Condensed Italic", Monotype series 294. [59][16][17]
Some Arts and Crafts movement-influenced printers such as Gill also revived
the original italic system of italic lower-case only from the nineteenth
century onwards.[60]

_The Chicago Manual of Style_ suggests that to avoid problems such as
overlapping and unequally spaced characters, parentheses and brackets
surrounding text that begins and ends in italic or oblique type should also be
italicised _(as in this example)_. An exception to this rule applies when only
one end of the parenthetical is italicised (in which case roman type is
preferred, _as on the right of this example_ ).

In _The Elements of Typographic Style_ , however, it is argued that since
Italic delimiters are not historically correct, the upright versions should
always be used, while paying close attention to kerning.

In media where italicization is not possible, alternatives are used as
substitutes:

In HTML, the `i` element is used to produce italic (or oblique) text. When the
author wants to indicate emphasised text, modern Web standards recommend using
the `em` element, because it conveys that the content is to be emphasised,
even if it cannot be displayed in italics. Conversely, if the italics are
purely ornamental rather than meaningful, then semantic markup practices would
dictate that the author use the Cascading Style Sheets declaration `font-
style: italic;` along with an appropriate, semantic class name instead of an
`i` or `em` element.

