**James Neville Mason** (/ˈmeɪsən/; 15 May 1909 – 27 July 1984) was an English
actor. Mason achieved considerable success in British cinema before becoming
one of Hollywood's biggest stars. He was the top box office attraction in the
UK in 1944 and 1945, with notable films including _The Seventh Veil_ (1945)
and _The Wicked Lady_ (1945). He starred in _Odd Man Out_ (1947), the first
recipient of the BAFTA Award for Best British Film.

He starred in a number of successful British and American films from the 1950s
to the early 1980s, including _The Desert Fox_ , _A Star Is Born_ , _20,000
Leagues Under the Sea_ , _Lolita_ , _North by Northwest_ , _The Prisoner of
Zenda_ , _Journey to the Centre of the Earth_ , _A Touch of Larceny_ , _Bigger
Than Life_ , _Julius Caesar_ , _Georgy Girl_ , _The Deadly Affair_ , _Age of
Consent_ , _Heaven Can Wait_ , _The Boys from Brazil_ , _The Verdict_ ,
_Mandingo_ , _Murder by Decree_ and _Salem's Lot._

Mason was nominated for three Academy Awards, three Golden Globes (winning the
Golden Globe in 1955 for _A Star is Born_) and two BAFTA Awards throughout his
career. Following his death in 1984, his ashes were interred near the tomb of
his close friend, fellow English actor Sir Charlie Chaplin.

Mason was born in Huddersfield, in the West Riding of Yorkshire, to Mabel
Hattersley (Gaunt) and John Mason.[1]

His father was a wealthy textile merchant. He was educated at Marlborough
College, and earned a first in Architecture at Peterhouse, Cambridge, where he
became involved in stock theatre companies in his spare time. Mason had no
formal training in acting and initially embarked upon it for fun.

After Cambridge, Mason made his stage debut in Aldershot in _The Rascal_ in
1931.[2][3]

He joined the Old Vic theatre in London under the guidance of Tyrone
Guthrie.[4] While there he appeared in productions of _The Cherry Orchard_ ,
_Henry VIII_ , _Measure for Measure_ , _The Importance of Being Earnest_ ,
_Love for Love_ , _The Tempest_ , _Twelfth Night_ , and _MacBeth_. Featuring
in many of these were Charles Laughton and Elsa Lanchester).

In 1933 Alexander Korda gave Mason a small role in _The Private Life of Don
Juan_ but sacked him three days into shooting.[5]

From 1935 to 1938, he starred in many British quota quickies, starting with
his first film _Late Extra_ (1935), in which he played the lead. Albert Parker
directed.

Mason went on to appear in _Twice Branded_ (1936); _Troubled Waters_ (1936),
also directed by Parker; _Prison Breaker_ (1936); _Blind Man's Bluff_ (1936),
for Parker' _The Secret of Stamboul_ (1936), and _The Mill on the Floss_
(1936), an "A" movie.

Mason had a key support role in Korda's _Fire Over England_ (1937) with
Laurence Olivier and Vivien Leigh. He was in another "A", _The High Command_
(1937) directed by Thorold Dickinson then went back to quickies, starring in
_Catch As Catch Can_ (1937), directed by Roy Kellino.

Korda used him again as the villain in _The Return of the Scarlet Pimpernel_
(1937).

Mason began appearing in some televised productions of plays, made in the very
early days of television: _Cyrano de Bergerac_ (1938), _The Moon in the Yellow
River_ (1938), _Bees on the Boat-Deck_ (1939), _Square Pegs_ (1939), _L’Avare_
(1939), and _The Circle_ (1939).

He returned to features with _I Met a Murderer_ (1939) based on a story by
Mason and Pamela Kellino, who also starred with Mason and who he would marry.
Her then-husband Roy Kellino directed.

He registered as a conscientious objector during the Second World War[6]
(causing his family to break with him for many years), but his tribunal
exempted him only on the requirement to do non-combatant military service,
which he refused; his appeal against this became irrelevant by including him
in a general exemption for film work.[7]

In 1941-42 he returned to the stage to appear in _Jupiter Laughs_ by A.J.
Cronin.

He established himself as a leading man in Britain in a series of films: _The
Patient Vanishes_ (1941); _Hatter's Castle_ (1941) with Robert Newton and
Deborah Kerr; _The Night Has Eyes_ (1941); _Alibi_ (1942) with Margaret
Lockwood; _Secret Mission_ (1942); _Thunder Rock_ (1942) with Michael
Redgrave; and _The Bells Go Down_ (1943) with Tommy Trinder.

Mason became hugely popular for his brooding anti-heroes in the Gainsborough
series of melodramas of the 1940s, starting with _The Man in Grey_ (1943). The
film was a huge hit and launched him and co-stars Lockwood, Stewart Granger
and Phyllis Calvert, to top level stars.

Mason starred in two war time dramas, _They Met in the Dark_ (1943) and
_Candlelight in Algeria_ (1944), then returned to Gainbsorough melodrama with
_Fanny By Gaslight_ (1944) with Granger and Calvert; it was another big hit.

Mason starred in _Hotel Reserve_ (1944), a thriller, then did a ghost story
for Gainsborough with Lockwood, _A Place of One's Own_ (1945). Far more
popular was a melodrama, _They Were Sisters_ (1945).[8][9]

Sydney Box cast Mason in the lead of a musical melodrama, _The Seventh Veil_
(1945) alongside Ann Todd. It was a huge success in Britain and the US and
demand for Mason was at a fever pitch. Exhibitors voted him the most popular
star in Britain in each year between 1944 and 1947. They also thought he was
the most popular international star in 1946; he dropped to second place the
following year.[10][11] He was the most popular male star in Canada in
1948.[12]

Mason had a relatively minor role in _The Wicked Lady_ (1946) with Lockwood, a
big hit. Mason then received his best reviews to date playing a mortally
wounded IRA bank robber on the run in Carol Reed's _Odd Man Out_
(1947).[13][14]

Mason was able to turn producer on a film with Box, written by his wife and
starring Mason, _The Upturned Glass_ (1947). It was not a noted success.
Neither was _Bathsheba_ , a play he and his wife did on Broadway.

Mason went to Hollywood where his first film was _Caught_ (1949), directed by
Max Ophuls. He played Gustave Flaubert in MGM's _Madame Bovary_ (1949).

Mason did another with Ophuls, _The Reckless Moment_ (1949), then did _East
Side, West Side_ (1949) with Barbara Stanwyck at MGM and _One Way Street_
(1950) at Universal. He made _Pandora and the Flying Dutchman_ (1951) with Ava
Gardner. None of these films was particularly successful.

Mason's Hollywood career was revived when cast as General Rommel in _The
Desert Fox: The Story of Rommel_ (1951), directed by Henry Hathaway. To do the
film he agreed to sign a contract with 20th Century Fox for seven years at one
film a year.[15]

Mason did a film at Republic Pictures written by his wife and directed by Roy
Kellino, _Lady Possessed_ (1951). At Fox he played a spy in _5 Fingers_ (1951)
directed by Joseph L. Mankiewicz.

MGM hired him to play Rupert of Hentzau in _The Prisoner of Zenda_ (1952)
opposite Granger. He was in the lower budgeted _Face to Face_ (1952) then went
to Paramont to play a villainous sea captain opposite Alan Ladd in _Botany
Bay_ (1953).

Mason was one of many stars in MGM's _The Story of Three Loves_ (1953). At Fox
he reprised his role as Rommel in _The Desert Rats_ (1953), then he was
reunited with Mankiewicz at MGM, playing Brutus in _Julius Caesar_ (1953),
opposite Marlon Brando. The film was very successful.

Mason was reunited with Carol Reed in _The Man Between_ (1954), then Fox used
him as a villain again in _Prince Valiant_ (1954).

Mason did another film written by his wife and directed by his father in law,
_Charade_ (1954).

Warner Bros hired him to play Judy Garland's leading man in _A Star Is Born_
(1954). He went over to Disney to play Captain Nemo in _20,000 Leagues Under
the Sea_ (1954), a huge hit.

Mason appeared with Lucille Ball and Desi Arnaz in _Forever, Darling_ (1956)
then starred in and produced a film at Fox, _Bigger Than Life_ (1956),
directed by Nicholas Ray. Mason played a small-town school teacher driven
insane by the effects of cortisone. He did another for Fox, the hugely popular
melodrama, _Island in the Sun_ (1957).

Mason began appearing regularly on television in shows such as _Panic!_ ,
_General Electric Theater_ , _Schlitz Playhouse_ , _Goodyear Theatre_ and
_Playhouse 90_ (several episodes including _John Brown's Raid_ ). In the
1950s, Mason was host of _Lux Video Theatre_ on CBS television.[16]

He starred in two thrillers for Andrew L. Stone, _Cry Terror!_ (1958) and _The
Decks Ran Red_ (1958) then played a suave master spy in _North by Northwest_
(1959) directed by Alfred Hitchcock.

At Fox he had a huge hit playing a determined scientist and explorer in
_Journey to the Centre of the Earth_ (1959), taking over a role meant for
Clifton Webb. He did a comedy _A Touch of Larceny_ (1960) and was Sir Edward
Carson in _The Trials of Oscar Wilde_ (1960).

He continued to appear on TV shows like _The DuPont Show with June Allyson_ ,
_Golden Showcase_ , _Theatre '62_ and _The Alfred Hitchcock Hour_.

He did _The Marriage-Go-Round_ (1961), then played Humbert Humbert in Stanley
Kubrick's version of _Lolita_ (1962).

He starred in _Tiara Tahiti_ (1962), then _Hero's Island_ (1962), which he
also produced. He was in _Torpedo Bay_ (1963).

In 1963 Mason settled in Switzerland, and embarked on a transatlantic
career.[17] He began to drift into support roles, or second leads: the epic
_The Fall of the Roman Empire_ (1964); _The Pumpkin Eater_ (1964), with Anne
Bancroft; a river pirate who betrays Peter O'Toole's character in _Lord Jim_
(1965); a Chinese noble in _Genghis Khan_ (1965); _The Uninhibited_ (1965); a
guest role on _Dr Kildare_ ; James Leamington in the Swinging London-set
_Georgy Girl_ (1966), a role that earned him a second Academy Award
nomination.

He was in several episodes of _ITV Play of the Week_ and he had the lead in
_The Deadly Affair_ (1967) for Sidney Lumet and _Stranger in the House_
(1968).

He provided a supporting role in _Duffy_ (1968) and _Mayerling_ (1968) but was
top billed in _The Sea Gull_ (1968) for Sidney Lumet and starred as Bradley
Morahan in _Age of Consent_ (1969) for Michael Powell, which Mason also
produced. He also had the star role in _Spring and Port Wine_ (1970).

Mason supported Charles Bronson in _Cold Sweat_ (1970), Alain Delon in _Crepa
padrone, crepa tranquillo_ (1970) and Lee Van Cleef in _Bad Man's River_
(1971). He was a support in _Kill! Kill! Kill! Kill!_ (1971) and top billed in
_Child's Play_ (1972) for Lumet, replacing Marlon Brando.

He was one of many stars in _The Last of Sheila_ (1973) and played the evil
Doctor Polidori in _Frankenstein: The True Story_ (1973). He had support roles
in _The MacKintosh Man_ (1973), _11 Harrowhouse_ (1974), _The Marseille
Contract_ (1974), and _Great Expectations_ (1974) and was top billed in
_Mandingo_ (1975).

Mason's later 70s performances included _Kidnap Syndicate_ (1975), _The Left
Hand of the Law_ (1975), _Autobiography of a Princess_ (1975), _Inside Out_
(1975), _The Flower in His Mouth_ (1975), _Voyage of the Damned_ (1976), _Hot
Stuff_ (1977), _Cross of Iron_ (1977), _Jesus of Nazareth_ (1977), _The Yin
and the Yang of Mr. Go_ (1978), _The Water Babies_ (1978), _Heaven Can Wait_
(1978), _The Boys from Brazil_ (1978), _Murder by Decree_ (1979) (as Watson),
_The Passage_ (1979), _Bloodline_ (1979) and as the vampire's servant, Richard
Straker, in _Salem's Lot_ (1979). In 1979 he did _Faith Healer_ on Broadway
but it only had a short run.

Mason was in _North Sea Hijack_ (1980), _Evil Under the Sun_ (1982), _Ivanhoe_
(1982), and _A Dangerous Summer_ (1982).

One of his last roles, that of the corrupt lawyer Ed Concannon in _The
Verdict_ (1982), earned him his third and final Oscar nomination.

He had parts in _Yellowbeard_ (1983), _Alexandre_ (1983), and _George
Washington_ (1984).

In 1967 Mason narrated the documentary _The London Nobody Knows_. An ardent
cinephile on top of his career interests, Mason then went on to narrate two
British documentary series supervised by Kevin Brownlow: _Hollywood_ (1980),
on the silent cinema and _Unknown Chaplin_ (1983), devoted to out-take
material from the films of Sir Charlie Chaplin. Mason had been a long-time
neighbour and friend of the comedian. In the late 1970s, Mason became a mentor
to up-and-coming actor Sam Neill.[18]

Having completed playing the lead role in _Dr. Fischer of Geneva_ (1985),
adapted from Graham Greene's eponymous novella for the BBC, he stepped into
the role in _The Shooting Party_ originally meant for Paul Scofield, who was
unable to continue after being seriously injured in an accident on the first
day of shooting. This was to be Mason's final screen performance in a feature
film.[19]

He did appear on TV in _A.D._ (1985) and _The Assisi Underground_ (1985).

Mason was a devoted lover of animals, particularly cats. He and his wife,
Pamela Mason, co-authored the book _The Cats in Our Lives_ , which was
published in 1949. James Mason wrote most of the book and also illustrated it.
In _The Cats in Our Lives_ , he recounted humorous and sometimes touching
tales of the cats (as well as a few dogs) he had known and loved.

In 1952, Mason purchased a house previously owned by Buster Keaton. He
discovered several nitrate film reels of films thought to have been lost,
stored in the house and produced by the comedian, such as _The Boat_. Mason
arranged to have the decomposing films transferred to safety stock and thus
saved them from oblivion.[20]

In his youth, Mason was a keen fan of his local Rugby League team,
Huddersfield. In later years he also began to follow the fortunes of
Huddersfield Town[21]

Mason was married twice:

Mason's autobiography, _Before I Forget_ , was published in 1981.

Mason survived a severe heart attack in 1959.[23] He died as result of another
heart attack on 27 July 1984 in Lausanne, Switzerland[24] and was cremated.

Mason left his entire estate to his second wife, Clarissa Kaye, but his will
was challenged by his two children. The lawsuit had not been settled when she
died on 21 July 1994 from cancer.[22] Clarissa Kaye Mason left her holdings to
the religious guru Sathya Sai Baba, including the actor's ashes which she had
retained in their shared home. Mason's children sued Sai Baba and subsequently
had Mason's ashes interred in Corsier-sur-Vevey, Vaud, Switzerland.[25] The
remains of Mason's friend Charlie Chaplin are in a tomb a few steps away.[25]
Mason's children specified that his headstone read: "Never say in grief you
are sorry he's gone. Rather, say in thankfulness you are grateful he was
here," words that were spoken to Portland Mason by U.S. Senator Ted Kennedy
after the actor's death.[26]

