**James Madison University** (also known as **JMU** , **Madison** , or **James
Madison** ) is a public research university in Harrisonburg, Virginia. Founded
in 1908 as the State Normal and Industrial School for Women at Harrisonburg,
the institution was renamed Madison College in 1938 in honor of President
James Madison and then James Madison University in 1977.[4] The university is
situated in the Shenandoah Valley, with the campus quadrangle located on South
Main Street.

Founded in 1908 as a women's college, James Madison University was established
by the Virginia General Assembly. It was originally called **The State Normal
and Industrial School for Women** at Harrisonburg. In 1914, the name of the
university was changed to the **StateNormal School for Women at
Harrisonburg.** At first, academic offerings included only today's equivalent
of technical training or junior college courses; however authorization to
award bachelor's degrees was granted in 1916. During this initial period of
development, the campus plan was established and six buildings were
constructed.[5]

The university became the **State Teachers College at Harrisonburg** in 1924
and continued under that name until 1938, when it was named **Madison
College** in honor of James Madison, the fourth President of the United States
whose Montpelier estate is located in nearby Orange, Virginia. In 1976, the
university's name was changed to James Madison University.[5]

The first president of the university was Julian Ashby Burruss. The university
opened its doors to its first student body in 1909 with an enrollment of 209
students and a faculty of 15. Its first 20 graduates received diplomas in
1911.[5]

In 1919, Julian Burruss resigned the presidency to become president of
Virginia Polytechnic Institute. Samuel Page Duke was then chosen as the second
president of the university. During Duke's administration, nine major
buildings were constructed.[5] Duke served as president from 1919 to 1949.

In 1946, men were first enrolled as regular day students. G. Tyler Miller
became the third president of the university in 1949, following the retirement
of Samuel Duke. During Miller's administration, from 1949 to 1970, the campus
was enlarged by 240 acres (0.97 km2) and 19 buildings were constructed. Major
curriculum changes were made and the university was authorized to grant
master's degrees in 1954.[5]

In 1966, by action of the Virginia General Assembly, the university became a
coeducational institution. Ronald E. Carrier, JMU's fourth president, headed
the institution from 1971 to 1998. During Carrier's administration, student
enrollment and the number of faculty and staff tripled, doctoral programs were
authorized, more than twenty major campus buildings were constructed and the
university was recognized repeatedly by national publications as one of the
finest institutions of its type in America. Carrier Library is named after
him.[5]

During the first decade of the 21st century, during the administration of
JMU's fifth President Linwood H. Rose, the university continued to rapidly
expand, not only through new construction east of Interstate 81, but also on
the west side of campus. In early 2005, JMU purchased the Rockingham Memorial
Hospital campus just north of the main JMU campus for over $40 million. The
hospital has since moved to a new location, and JMU now occupies the former
hospital site after having made substantial renovations to the previous
hospital campus.[6] Additionally in June 2005, the university expanded across
South High Street by leasing the former Harrisonburg High School building from
the City of Harrisonburg. In May 2006, the university purchased the
property.[7] The sale was approved in June 2005 for $17 million.[8][9] The
university named the old HHS building Memorial Hall.[10] Recently completed
projects include the Rose Library located on the east side of campus, which
opened on August 11, 2008. The John C. Wells Planetarium, first opened in
1974, underwent a $1.5 million renovation in 2008. It is now a state-of-the-
art hybrid planetarium, the only one of its kind in the world. The mission of
the JMU Planetarium is science education and public outreach. As such, it
offers free shows to the public every Saturday afternoon and hosts annual
summer space camps in July. The 175,000-square-foot (16,300 m2) Forbes Center
for the Performing Arts opened in June 2010, and serves as the home to JMU's
School of Theatre and Dance. It also provides major performance venues and
support spaces for the School of Music, and the administrative office for the
Dean of the College of Visual and Performing Arts.

The rapid expansion of JMU's campus has at times created tension in the city-
university relationship.[11] In 2006, the local ABC affiliate reported that
the university had nearly doubled in size in the last 20 years,[12] including
purchases of several local properties.[13][14]

The university has also experienced tension with local residents with
occasional clashes between local police and students at a popular off-campus
block party. In 2000, the party with about 2,500 students grew out of hand and
required a police presence at the Forest Hills townhouse complex on Village
Lane.[15] Ten years later, police equipped with riot gear used force to
disperse a group of 8,000 college-aged individuals at the party.[16][17][18]
Several participants were airlifted to a medical center in Charlottesville to
treat their injuries.[19] The university has condemned the behavior of the
block party attendees.[20]

James Madison University is considered "More Selective" by the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. For the Class of 2012, the
university received 22,648[21] applications, for an entering freshmen class of
4,325 for the 2012–2013 academic year.[22] The retention rate for the
2011–2012 freshman class was 91.4%, and the ratio of female to male students
is 60/40. Approximately 38% of students are from out-of-state, representing
all 50 states and 89 foreign countries.

Currently, James Madison University offers 115 degree programs on the
bachelor's, master's, educational specialist, and doctoral levels. The
university comprises seven colleges and 78 academic programs. The university
includes the College of Arts and Letters; the College of Business; the College
of Education; the College of Health and Behavioral Studies; the College of
Integrated Science and Engineering; the College of Science and Mathematics;
the College of Visual and Performing Arts; and The Graduate School. Total
enrollment beginning the Fall 2012 academic year was 19,927; 18,392
undergraduates and 1,820 graduate students. JMU granted 4,908 degrees in 2012;
4,096 undergraduate degrees, and 812 graduate degrees.

On October 2, 2009, James Madison University was granted a chapter by the Phi
Beta Kappa academic honor society.[23] Only about 10 percent of the country's
colleges and universities have Phi Beta Kappa chapters. James Madison
University's chapter of Phi Kappa Phi was the first academic honor society
chartered at JMU. The Honor Society of Phi Kappa Phi (or simply Phi Kappa Phi
or ΦΚΦ) is an honor society established in 1897 to recognize and encourage
superior scholarship without restriction as to area of study and to promote
the "unity and democracy of education".

On June 24, 2004, the Board of Visitors approved the Madison College Proposal,
which created the College of Visual and Performing Arts out of the College of
Arts and Letters. The College of Visual and Performing Arts includes the
School of Art, Design and Art History, the School of Music, the School of
Theatre and Dance, and the Madison Art Collection. Approximately 1,200
students are enrolled in the college, and the Master of Fine Arts degree
offered by the School of Art, Design and Art History is nationally ranked by
_U.S. News and World Report_.

On January 9, 2007, the School of Engineering was approved by the Virginia
higher education governing body.[24] The school began accepting undergraduates
in Fall 2008. The program focuses on sustainability with a major emphasis on
the environmental sciences. The School of Engineering offers general
engineering degrees with no specializations.

_U.S. News& World Report_ ranked JMU as the No. 2 public masters-level
university in the South (6th overall) for 2019.[29] In the 2018 _Washington
Monthly_ college rankings, JMU ranked 8th among master's universities
nationwide. _Washington Monthly_ assesses the quality of schools based on
social mobility (recruiting and graduating low-income students), research
(producing cutting-edge scholarship and PhDs), and service (encouraging
students to give something back to their country).[30]

JMU's College of Business was ranked 40th among the undergraduate business
programs in the U.S. by _BloombergBusiness_ in 2014.[31] The university is
also ranked 21st in value in the nation among public colleges and
universities, according to _Kiplinger_ magazine's 2015 "100 Best Values in
Public Colleges".[32] JMU ranked 15th among all undergraduate business schools
in the country for return on investment, according to _BloombergBusiness_ in
2013.[33]

The campus of JMU originally consisted of two buildings, known today as
Jackson and Maury Halls.[34] Today, the campus of James Madison University has
148 major buildings on 721 acres (2.92 km2) in Harrisonburg, VA.[35] And it
has since become the second most photographed location on social media sites
like Instagram and Twitter in the state of Virginia, second to King Dominion.
The campus is divided into five parts: Bluestone, Hillside, Lakeside, Skyline,
and the Village.[36] The Skyline area is located on the east side of
Interstate 81, while the Bluestone, Hillside, Lakeside, and Village areas of
the campus are located on the west side. The two sides of campus are connected
both by a bridge over, and a tunnel (Duke Dog Alley) underneath, Interstate
81.[37] Other unique features on the campus include Newman Lake, a 9.7-acre
(39,000 m2) body of water located in the Lake Area next to Greek Row and
Sonner Hall,[38] and the Edith J. Carrier Arboretum, a 125-acre urban
botanical preserve located within the city of Harrisonburg and the campus of
James Madison University (JMU). The Edith J. Carrier Arboretum combines
naturalized botanical gardens (33 acres) and forest (92 acres), and is the
only arboretum on a public university campus in Virginia.

The original, historic "Bluestone" side of campus is situated on South Main
Street (also known as U.S. Route 11, and historically as "The Valley Pike").
Since the late 1990s the campus has expanded both east and west of the
Bluestone area. Towards the east, across Interstate 81, the expansion has
included The College of Integrated Science and Technology (CISAT), the
University Recreation Center (UREC), the Festival Conference and Student
Center, the Leeolou Alumni Center, several residence halls, the Chemistry and
Physics Building, and University Park, which opened in 2012 off of Port
Republic Road, combining recreational and varsity athletic fields. The Rose
Library, completed in August 2008, serves as a repository of science and
technical material.[39]

Several new construction projects on the campus of James Madison University
were included in Governor Tim Kaine's $1.65 billion higher education bond
package. Governor Kaine's proposal designated more than $96 million for JMU
projects. Among the projects included were the construction of a new
biotechnology building, Centennial Hall ($44.8 million) and the renovation and
expansion of Duke Hall ($43.4 million). The proposal also included $8.6
million as the final installment payment for the purchase of Rockingham
Memorial Hospital.[40] Beginning in 2002 JMU began receiving state and private
funding to construct a state-of-the-art performing arts complex. The facility
is located opposite Wilson Hall across South Main Street, and serves to
visually complete the Main Quad. It was named "The Forbes Center for the
Performing Arts" in honor of Bruce and Lois Forbes who provided a gift of $5
million towards the project. The wing of The Forbes Center dedicated to
theater and dance is named the "Dorothy Thomasson Estes Center for Theatre and
Dance" in honor of a $2.5 million gift by the husband of Dorothy Estes. The
wing dedicated to music is named the "Shirley Hanson Roberts Center for Music
Performance" in honor of a multimillion-dollar gift from the husband of
Shirley Roberts. The entire PAC was built at a total cost exceeding $92
million, and opened in June 2010 to house academic offices and performances by
the Schools of Theatre, Dance and Music, and the administrative offices of the
College of Visual and Performing Arts.[41]

Wilson Hall is the centerpiece of the university's main quadrangle. It
contains an auditorium, administrative offices, and the Community Service
Learning Office. The building's cupola has been featured on the university
logo, letterhead, and other university stationery and postcards. Completed in
1931, the building was named after President Woodrow Wilson, who was born in
nearby Staunton, Virginia.

Bus service around campus and the city is provided by the Harrisonburg
Department of Public Transportation.

The _Princeton Review_ also recognized James Madison as one of 81 schools in
America "with a conscience", and in the latest year ranked JMU second in the
nation behind only the University of Virginia in the number of Peace Corps
volunteers it sent from its student body among "medium-sized"
universities.[42] And in 2010, the food at JMU was ranked third in the United
States.[43] In 2011 the student body was ranked 20th "happiest in the entire
nation" by _Newsweek_ and _The Daily Beast_.[44] These rankings take into
consideration the surrounding area's activities, academics, as well as the
social scene on campus.

The school has 35 residence halls, ten of which serve as sorority houses.[45]
While most residence halls are only for housing, several halls also provide
auxiliary services like computer labs and study lounges.[46] All freshmen must
live on campus, and a large portion of JMU's on-campus housing is set aside
for incoming students. Consequently, most upperclassmen and graduate students
live off campus. Continuing students who wish to live on campus must re-apply
for housing each year. While occasional exceptions are granted, generally
freshmen are not granted on-campus parking permits.[47] Some JMU halls are
set-aside as specialized living and learning residential communities.
Shenandoah Hall is devoted as an Honors residential experience, Chesapeake
Hall is for pre-professional health disciplines, Gifford Hall includes the
Roop Learning Community for future teachers, and Wayland Hall is reserved for
majors in the art disciplines.

James Madison University has over 350 clubs and organizations for students to
choose from. The goal is to provide students with a unique experience that
will help them to grow in community and in engagement outside of the
classroom.[48]

The JMU Student Government Association (SGA) was founded in 1915 and stood as
the first organization on campus. Their goal was to become an organization
whose role was to be the voice for the JMU student population and advocate on
behalf of the students to the administration and the rest of the community.

SGA consists of two governing bodies, the Executive Council and the Student
Senate. The Executive Council consists of the Student Body President, Student
Body Vice President, and SGA Treasurer, positions that are elected by the JMU
Student Body each academic year. The fourth member of the Executive Council is
the Speaker of the Senate who is voted on by the Student Senate. Meanwhile,
the Senate consists of Academic Senators and Class Council members who form
the various committees within the Senate.

SGA can be attributed to many of the traditions known to JMU, such as
Homecoming's Purple Out, Mr. and Ms. Madison, Ring Premiere, the Annual Tree
Lighting, the Big Event, and SafeRides. They also vote on Front End Budgeted
(FEB) organizational budgets each year as well as allocate contingency funds
to other organizations throughout the school year. In 2015, the organization
celebrated its 100th year since being founded.

James Madison University has the largest collegiate marching band in the
nation, with 535 members as of Fall 2018. Nicknamed "Virginia's Finest", the
Marching Royal Dukes have performed at venues such as the inaugurations of
Presidents Bill Clinton and George W. Bush, the NFC title game between
Washington and Dallas in 1983, Bands of America Grand National Championships
in 1988 and 1991. The band has made four appearances in the Macy's
Thanksgiving Day Parade, first in 2001, again in 2008, 2013 and most recently
in 2018. In the past decade, the band has taken trips to Europe during the
school's winter break, featuring Athens, Dublin, Monaco, London, and Rome.[49]
During their most recent trip to Europe, the MRDs participated in the 2015
Italian New Year's Day Parade in the Vatican.

The University Program Board (UPB) puts on large-scale events at JMU,
including concerts and themed alternative night-out events like Late Night
Breakfast.

The JMU Student Ambassadors work alongside the Admissions Office to offer
student-led tours for prospective students. While these positions are not
paid, there is an extensive selection process to become a member.

_The Breeze_ is a student-run newspaper serving James Madison University since
1922. Since then, the newspaper has provided news and information to the
university community. _The Breeze_ publishes 7,000 copies every Thursday and
maintains an online website, mobile app and a Twitter and Facebook page. _The
Breeze_ publishes local news, a culture section, sports and an opinion section
during the academic year. _The Breeze_ has been nominated and won numerous
awards during its existence including a 2012 Online Pacemaker Award, 2012 VPA
award for Best in Show for a Non-Daily News Presentation, and a 2012 VPA
sweepstakes award. _The Breeze_ is also known to all JMU alumni and current
students for having the long-standing tradition of publishing Darts & Pats.

The James Madison Speech Team has been recognized by AFA-NIET as one of the
top 20 intercollegiate speech teams in the nation. JMU Forensics is the only
program in the nation directed by two recipients of AFA's most respected
coaching awards: Distinguished Service and Outstanding New Coach.[50]

JMU is home to 9 different a cappella ensembles: four all-female, three all-
male, and two co-educational groups.[51] These groups are nationally
recognized, with many of the groups being featured on the Best of College A
Cappella (BOCA) yearly compilation albums.[52][53][54] Several of the groups,
such as Note-oriety and The Overtones, have gone "viral" for their music
videos, "Pretty Hurts"[55] and "Say Love"[56], respectively. Note-oriety has
also performed at the White House in Washington, D.C[57].

The JMU Men's and Women's Club Soccer Teams are two of the most decorated club
organizations in JMU school history. The men's program has an extensive
tradition of winning, most notably National Championships in 1999, 2000 &
2009\. Similarly, the women have won National Championships in 2009 & 2012\.
Both the men's and women's teams are involved in campus philanthropy,
including annual community fundraisers, as well as responsibility for the
upkeep of roadways through the Adopt-a-Highway program.

The JMU Men's Ultimate team, the Flying Hellfish, was founded in 1997.[58] The
team is named after the Simpsons episode 22, season 7, "Raging Abe Simpson and
His Grumbling Grandson in 'The Curse of the Flying Hellfish'"[59][60] Since
2005, the team has hosted an annual tournament known as "The Hellfish
Bonanza," which attracts between 12 and 16 teams from across the east
coast.[59] Several current and former Hellfish play Ultimate professionally
for Major League Ultimate's Washington DC Current and the American Ultimate
Disc League's DC Breeze.

Like all public universities in Virginia, James Madison is governed by a Board
of Visitors appointed by the Governor of Virginia.[61] In addition to the 15
members appointed by the governor, the speaker of the Faculty Senate and an
elected student representative serve as representatives for the faculty and
the student body respectively. The appointed members serve for a maximum of
two consecutive four-year terms, while the student representative is limited
to two one-year terms. The faculty representative serves for as long as he or
she remains the speaker of the JMU Faculty Senate.[61] Some appointed members
of note include former presidential candidate Carly Fiorina and former first
lady of Virginia, Susan Allen.

Jonathan R. Alger is the sixth and current president of the university. Before
being named president, Alger served as the senior vice president and counsel
at Rutgers University.[62]

James Madison University's athletic teams are known as the "Dukes." An English
bulldog, with crown and cape, and the Duke Dog, a gray bulldog costume in a
purple cape and crown, serve as the school's mascot. The "Dukes" nickname is
in honor of Samuel Page Duke, the university's second president. The school
colors are royal purple and gold. Madison competes in the NCAA's Division I in
the Colonial Athletic Association and the Eastern College Athletic Conference.

In football, they are in the NCAA's Football Championship Subdivision.[63]
Over 415 varsity athletes compete in football, men's and women's basketball,
men's and women's soccer, men's and women's tennis, women's swimming and
diving, women's volleyball, baseball, women's lacrosse, field hockey, men's
and women's golf, women's cross country and track and field, and softball.
James Madison's two national championships are tied for third most national
titles by a college or university in Virginia. James Madison's baseball team
advanced to the College World Series in 1983, becoming the first Virginia
school to do so. The JMU women's field hockey team won the university's first
national title in 1994. JMU football won the NCAA Division I-AA national title
in 2004, with a 13–2 record, and in 2016 with a 14-1 record going undefeated
in the FCS. They are the only team in history to win the title after playing
four straight road playoff games. Since 2004, the JMU football team has
appeared in the playoffs in 2006, 2007, 2008, 2011, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017,
and 2018.

James Madison University invested heavily in new athletic facilities
throughout the tenure of President Linwood Rose. JMU built a new multimillion-
dollar baseball and softball field complex that opened in 2010. Additionally,
after the last football game of 2009, the university began an expansion of
Bridgeforth Stadium that increased seating capacity to approximately 25,000.
Construction was completed in time for the 2011 football season.[64]

In 2012, the James Madison women's basketball team won a program record 29
games, and advanced to the WNIT National Championship game, where it lost to
Oklahoma State University. The Lady Dukes defeated Wake Forest, Davidson
College, Virginia, South Florida and Syracuse prior to falling to Oklahoma
State. In 2013, head coach Kenny Brooks led his team back to the WNIT
defeating NC A&T, NC State, and Fordham before falling to Florida in the
tournament's quarterfinals. In 2014, the Lady Dukes posted an overall 29–6
record that culminated with an 85–69 loss to Texas A&M University in the NCAA
Championship Round of 32. This marked the ninth consecutive year that the Lady
Dukes participated in postseason play and the program's ninth consecutive
season with 20 victories, a school record.

In 2013, James Madison University's men's basketball team won the CAA
championship title for the first time since 1994. The Dukes then won their
first NCAA tournament game in 30 years, defeating Long Island University-
Brooklyn. The Dukes fell to Indiana in the second round, 83-62, finishing the
season with a 21–15 record.[65]

James Madison University is home to the John C. Wells Planetarium. The
planetarium first opened at JMU in 1956 under the direction of Dr. John C.
Wells, head of the Physics Department. The facility was then moved to Miller
Hall and renovated in 1975, later named in honor of Wells on the occasion of
his retirement in 1980.[66]

The planetarium seats 72 individuals within a 30-ft dome. It features a GOTO
Chronos star projector together with Evans & Sutherland Digistar 5 digital
projectors.[67] The John C. Wells Planetarium also employs students enrolled
at James Madison University to operate the system and host shows to the
public.

In the early years of the Miller Hall Planetarium, not yet named after Dr.
John Wells, all laboratories in the General Studies astronomy course met in
the planetarium as well as other astronomy classes such as "Controversies in
Astronomy" and "Planetary Astronomy".[66] As the Planetarium grew older, it
began scheduling astronomy instruction for off-campus groups. The planetarium
also hosts regular public shows and special events such as Starry Nights
Harrisonburg, Space Explorers Camp, and Bad Science Movie Nights as well.[68]

Coordinates: 38°26′18.4″N 78°52′25.5″W﻿ / ﻿38.438444°N 78.873750°W﻿ /
38.438444; -78.873750

