**Jeffrey Lord** (born 1950 or 1951)[1] is an American author, and political
strategist in Pennsylvania, who served as an associate political director in
the administration of former United States President Ronald Reagan.[2] He
subsequently became a highly visible political commentator for CNN and other
media outlets.[3]

Lord was born in Northampton, Massachusetts, in 1951.[4] He earned a degree
from Franklin and Marshall College.[5]

Lord first worked as a press aide in the Pennsylvania State Senate. He worked
for Pennsylvania congressman Bud Shuster as legislative director and press
secretary and for U.S. senator H. John Heinz III as executive assistant.
Later, Lord worked as chief of staff to Drew Lewis, for part of the time that
Lewis was a co-chairman of Pennsylvania for the Ronald Reagan presidential
campaign. He also served in the Reagan White House as an associate political
director 1987–1988.[5] In that position, he assisted in the judicial
nomination process for several nominees, including Robert Bork for the Supreme
Court.[6] He also worked for Jack Kemp during the presidency of George H. W.
Bush.[5]

Lord has worked as a political commentator, contributing material to CNN, _The
Weekly Standard_ , _The American Spectator,_ _National Review Online_ , the
_Wall Street Journal_ , the _Washington Times_ , the _Los Angeles Times,_ the
_Philadelphia Inquirer,_ the _Pittsburgh Post-Gazette_ , and the _Harrisburg
Patriot-News_. He has appeared as a guest on numerous television and radio
programs. He also works as a political consultant for Quantum Communications,
a Harrisburg-based political strategy firm.[5]

He is the author of _The Borking Rebellion_ , about the confirmation of
Federal Judge D. Brooks Smith.[5] It received a generally positive review in
the _Wall Street Journal_.[7] His more recent book, published in January 2016
(from which he gained the name, "The Trump Defender"),[8] is _What America
Needs: The Case for Trump_.

In July 2010, after Shirley Sherrod stated that one of her relatives had been
lynched in the 1940s, Lord wrote an article in _the American Spectator_
pointing out the man in question had actually been beaten to death by police
officers. Lord questioned Sherrod's "veracity and credibility".[9] He faced
substantial criticism as a result,[10][11][12] including criticism from other
contributors to _American Spectator_.[13][14]

In August 2011, Lord wrote an article in _The American Spectator_ criticizing
Texas Republican Congressman Ron Paul and the views of some of his
supporters.[15] The article sparked considerable debate within the
conservative movement.[16]

In May 2012, Lord wrote an article in _The American Spectator_ in which he
compared President Barack Obama with Mao Zedong because of the similarities
between Obama's slogan "Forward" and Chairman Mao's Great Leap Forward.[17] In
the same article, he also compared Obama with the Hitler Youth due to their
song "Vorwärts! Vorwärts!" ("Forward, Forward!").

In February 2015, Lord called upon the Republican Party to demand an apology
from the Democratic Party for their role in promoting and defending slavery
and creating the segregationist Jim Crow system.[18]

In June 2015, Lord wrote an open letter to Debbie Wasserman Schultz, head of
the U.S. Democratic Party, asking her to apologize for her party's role in
Indian removal, in promoting and defending slavery, in Confederate secession
and in creating segregationist Jim Crow regimes. Lord asserted that the
Democrats' historical support for such institutions contributed, and continues
to contribute, to the existence of racism and bigotry in American society.[19]

In March 2016, during a Super Tuesday election night on CNN, an argument
ensued for several minutes between Lord and a CNN contributor, Van Jones,
about Lord's defense of Donald Trump. The argument came about when a fellow
contributor, conservative commentator S. E. Cupp, accused Trump of "crazy, dog
whistle policy proposals", that she believed he had made to attract prejudiced
voters,[20] and because Trump had hesitated to disavow KKK member David Duke
in a CNN interview the previous weekend. Lord responded that the KKK many
decades earlier had supported Democrats so the KKK was therefore left wing. He
accused those who raised these worries of dividing Americans by race.[21] Van
Jones questioned the relevance of the first point and declared the second
point "absurd". Lord responded that "history matters", that Democrats continue
to divide citizens by race today and that doing so is "morally wrong".[22]

In April 2017, on a CNN discussion program hosted by Don Lemon and featuring
three other panelists including CNN commentator Symone Sanders, Lord
maintained, as he had on an earlier CNN program, that President Donald Trump
was the "Martin Luther King" of health care, explicitly comparing and equating
Trump tactics to King tactics. This infuriated both Lemon and Sanders. Lemon
ended the program after a few more minutes of discussion.[23]

CNN fired Lord on August 10, 2017, after he tweeted "Sieg Heil!" to Angelo
Carusone, president of Media Matters for America, suggesting Carusone was a
fascist.[24] CNN subsequently filled Lord's role as a pro-Trump contributor
with Missouri politician Ed Martin.[25][26]

