**Jejemon** (Tagalog pronunciation: [ˈdʒɛdʒɛmɔ̝n]) is a popular culture
phenomenon in the Philippines. According to Urban Dictionary, a Jejemon is a
person "who has managed to subvert the English language to the point of
incomprehensibility." [1] The _Philippine Daily Inquirer_ describes Jejemons
as a "new breed of hipster who have developed not only their own language and
written text but also their own subculture and fashion."[2][3]

This style of shorthand typing arose through the short messaging service, in
which each text message sent by a cellphone is limited to 160 characters,
evident in popular phone models in the early 2000s such as Nokia 5110.[4] As a
result, an "SMS language" developed in which words were shortened in order to
fit the 160-character limit. However, some jejemons are not really
"conserving" characters; instead, they are lengthening their message.[2] On
April 14, 2010, on a Pinoy Tumblr, a post about vice presidential candidate
Jejomar Binay indicated that he was the Jejemon's preferred vice presidential
candidate, complete with a fake poster with him called "Makki Autors". Later
the use of word _jejemon_ to refer to such people made rounds in various
Filipino internet message boards.[2]

The word Jejemon is a portmanteau of the Japanese animated series, Pokémon,
and _hehe_ is an expression of laughter.

Such short-handed language is not limited to Filipinos: Thais use "5555" to
denote "hahahaha," since the number 5 in Thai language is pronounced as
"ha."[3]

The Jejemons are said to be the new _jologs_ , a term used for Filipinos of
the lower income class.[1][3] The parameters of being classified as a Jejemon
are still unclear, and how the different "levels" of "Jejemonism" are
reached,[5] although there are named levels such as "mild," "moderate" and
"severe" or "terminal."[6]

The sociolect of the Jejemons, called _Jejenese_ , is derived from English,
Filipino and their code-switched variant, Taglish. It has its own, albeit
unofficial, orthography, known as _Jejebet_ , which uses the Filipino variant
of the Roman alphabet, Arabic numerals and other special characters. Words are
created by rearranging letters in a word, alternating capitalization, over-
usage of the letters H, X or Z.[3] Superfluous as well as the presence of
silent letters characterize its spelling convention. It has similarities with
Leetspeak, primarily the alphanumeric nature of its writing.

Several Facebook fan pages were created both in support and against the group.
Celebrities such as Alessandra de Rossi, Ces Drilon, and Lourd de Veyra have
condemned the wholesale ridicule of the subculture.[2][7] Due to the sudden
existence of jejemons, 'Jejebusters' were created, a group of internet grammar
vigilantes, typically Filipinos, dedicating their internet lives towards the
eradication of jejetyping and jejemon existence.

YouTube videos were also uploaded parodying the Jejemons, connecting them to
the 2010 election campaign. Edited television advertisements of Nacionalista
Party proclaiming their disdain, and an edited photograph of Gilberto Teodoro
with him holding a sign saying that the Jejemons should be "brought back to
elementary school" went viral.[8] In 2010, the Filipino GMA Network broadcast
the situational comedy _JejeMom_ , headlined by Eugene Domingo.

As part of the pre-school year clean-up of schools for the upcoming 2010–11
school year, the Department of Education (DepEd) strongly discourages students
from using Jejemon spelling and grammar, especially in text messaging.
Communicating with others using Jejemon "language" is said to cause
deterioration of young Filipino students’ language skills.[9]

From early 2013 onwards, with the rise of smartphones which began to overtake
feature phones in terms of sales in the country, the phenomenon seems to have
made a gradual decline in mainstream popularity. Some social media accounts
use such spellings to this date, but most of them are used for sarcasm. The
term "jejemon" would gradually shift definition to a pejorative term to
describe a stereotype of poorly educated young people wearing hip-hop
clothing, roughly similar to the British slang term chav for sportswear. As of
2017, the Jejemon are also called "hypebeasts" and are recognizable for
wearing counterfeit skateboarding or car culture-related brands.

