**James Calvin Rollins** (born November 27, 1978), nicknamed **"J-Roll"** ,[1]
is an American former professional baseball shortstop, who played in Major
League Baseball (MLB) for the Philadelphia Phillies (2000–2014), Los Angeles
Dodgers (2015), and Chicago White Sox (2016).

After growing up in Alameda, California, and attending Encinal High School,
Rollins was drafted by the Phillies in the second round of the 1996 MLB draft.
After spending most of five seasons with Phillies minor league teams, he made
his big league debut on September 17, 2000.

At the MLB level, it wasn’t long before Rollins earned recognition as an
excellent defensive shortstop. In 2001, he became the Phillies' leadoff
hitter, a role he retained for almost ten years. Rollins made three All-Star
Game appearances in his career. While with the Phillies, he compiled a 38-game
hitting streak, which spanned the end of the 2005 season and the start of the
2006 season, the longest in team history. Rollins was named the National
League (NL) Most Valuable Player (MVP) in 2007, as the Phillies won their
division in the first of five consecutive seasons. He was also a key component
of the 2008 World Series champion team that defeated the Tampa Bay Rays.[1]

In his career, Rollins led the NL four times in triples, and once each in
runs, stolen bases, and stolen base percentage.[1] As of 2018, he was the
Phillies career leader in at bats (8,628), hits (2,306), doubles (479), and
power-speed number (292.5), second in games played (2,090) and stolen bases
(453), and third in runs scored (1,325), triples (111), and stolen base
percentage (82.66).[2] Rollins won the Gold Glove Award four times, as well as
the Silver Slugger Award, and the Roberto Clemente Award (once each).[1]

Rollins grew up in Alameda as a member of an athletic family.[3] His mother
played competitive fastpitch softball, and he credits the experience with
helping him develop a cerebral approach to the game, as well as a passion for
the middle infield. His father was a wrestler and weightlifter.[4] Rollins has
been described as having "a near-photographic memory of games and at-bats and
pitches".[5] Rollins' brother, Antwon, played with minor league affiliates of
the Texas Rangers and the Montreal Expos.[6] His sister, Shay Rollins, was a
starter on the University of San Francisco's women's basketball team,[7] and
he is the cousin of former MLB player Tony Tarasco.[1] Despite the athletes in
his family, his father encouraged Rollins to pursue music as well as baseball.
Rollins played the trumpet while growing up, and participated in various MC
Hammer and Mavis Staples music videos during his adolescent years.[3][8]
Rollins was an Oakland Athletics fan growing up and regularly attended games
at Oakland–Alameda County Coliseum.[9]

In 1996, Rollins graduated from Encinal High School in Alameda.[8] His parents
refused to let him continue playing football, instead directing him to focus
on baseball.[4] He finished his high school baseball career as the holder of
10 school records, including highest batting average (.484), and most stolen
bases (99). For his performance, _USA Today_ named him a member of its All-USA
High School Baseball Team, and _Baseball America_ named him the top infielder
in Northern California, as well as a second-team All-American.[8] The American
Baseball Coaches Association and Rawlings also named Rollins to their All-
America Second Team.[10] He committed to play college baseball at Arizona
State University on a scholarship, but after "effusive" praise from Phillies'
Bay Area scout Bob Poole, the team drafted him in the second round of the 1996
Major League Baseball draft.[4]

After being drafted by the Phillies in the second round of the 1996 draft,[1]
Rollins was assigned to the rookie-league Martinsville Phillies. He led the
team in walks and stole 20 bases, but batted only .238/.351/.285.[11]

However, Rollins still earned a promotion to the low-A Piedmont Boll Weevils
for the 1997 season. The youngest player on the team at age 18,[8] he led the
team in games played, at-bats, runs (94; 5th in the league), hits (151; 4th),
triples (8; tied for 4th), stolen bases (46; 5th), and walks.[12][13] Rollins
batted .270/.330/.370 and had 560 at-bats, over 100 more than second-place
Dave Francia.[13] For his performance, he was named a co-winner of the Paul
Owens Award, given to the Phillies' top minor league player. At the end of the
season, Rollins played in the Florida Instructional League.[8]

Rollins was promoted to high-A Clearwater in 1998. While playing alongside
future Phillies teammates Pat Burrell, Johnny Estrada, Adam Eaton, and Brandon
Duckworth, Rollins batted .244/.306/.354 with 18 doubles and 23 stolen bases;
once again, he was the youngest player on the team.[14] Eaton, Burrell, and
Rollins were all promoted to AA Reading together the next year, and Rollins
led the team in games and at-bats, as well as hits. His 145 hits gave him an
average of .273,[15] and led to a late-season promotion to Scranton/Wilkes-
Barre, where he played four games.[16] In 2000, he led Scranton in games
played, doubles, and triples, and helped lead the team to the playoffs.[17]

Rollins received a September call-up to the Phillies. He debuted on September
17 against the Florida Marlins and had two hits in four at-bats in the game,
with his first MLB hit being a triple off of Chuck Smith of the Marlins.[18]
He batted .321 in 14 games, stealing three bases and batting in five runs.[1]
After the season, _Baseball America_ named him the Phillies' top
organizational prospect. He was a finalist for the United States national
baseball team to participate in the 2000 Olympics.[8]

Rollins spent the entire 2001 season with the major league Phillies and hit
his first MLB home run on May 2 off of Brian Bohanon of the Colorado
Rockies.[19] He achieved several statistical milestones, including a
"quadruple-double" (double digit doubles, triples, home runs, and stolen
bases).[1] Moreover, he led the National League in triples and stolen bases,
becoming the first rookie to do so since 1951, as well as leading the NL in at
bats.[8] He was a member of the NL all-star team in the 2001 Major League
Baseball All-Star Game, the Phillies only representative.[20] In July, he took
over from Doug Glanville as the Phillies' leadoff hitter, a role he maintained
for nearly a decade.[21][22] At the conclusion of the season, the Negro
Leagues Baseball Museum named him the co-winner of the Cool Papa Bell Award,
given to the stolen bases leader; MLB managers voted him to the Topps Major
League Rookie All-Star team; and _Baseball America_ named him the fifth-best
rookie in MLB.[8]

Entering the 2002 season, despite his youth, Rollins sought to be a leader in
the Phillies' clubhouse; an article in _The Philadelphia Inquirer_ said,
"Rollins, even at just 23 years old, may now have the clout needed to be a
stern voice that makes a difference in the clubhouse and on the field."[21]
Rollins' season was characterized by a strong first half, and a "sophomore
jinx" at the plate that plagued him in the second half of the season.[23] For
his performance in the early months of the season, he earned his second
consecutive selection to the MLB All-Star game, in doing so becoming the first
Phillie and first MLB shortstop ever to reach the game in each of his first
two seasons.[8] After the all-star game, however, he struggled at the plate,
striking out frequently and chasing many high pitches that were out of the
strike zone.[23] Ultimately, Rollins finished the season among the NL leaders
in defensive statistics – he compiled a .980 fielding percentage (second in
NL), 695 total chances (third in NL), 504 assists (fourth in NL), and 226
putouts (fifth in NL). Meanwhile, offensively, he regressed from his 2001
campaign, batting .245/.306/.380 with 11 home runs, but still leading the NL
with 10 triples; he stole 31 bases, 15 fewer than he did in 2001. After the
season, he participated in the Major League Baseball Japan All-Star Series.[8]

Prior to the 2003 season, he worked with Tony Gwynn on skills at the plate,
predominantly using the whole field and being more of a "slap hitter".[24][25]
However, he began the season slowly, sustaining a hamstring injury in spring
training that hindered his progress,[26] and ultimately struggling at the
plate early in the season, causing manager Larry Bowa to drop him in the
lineup.[27] Throughout the season, he sought to maintain the focus that he
admitted to having lost the previous season,[28] and he eventually rebounded
to post a "respectable" stat line – a .263/.320/.387 with eight home runs and
62 RBIs, though he stole what at the time was a career-low 20 bases.[8][29]
Among his season highlights were a game-winning RBI against John Smoltz in
June, and stealing his 100th career base in September, both of which occurred
in games against the Atlanta Braves.[8]

On January 15, Rollins signed a $2.4 million contract with the Phillies to
avoid salary arbitration.[30] According to one biography of Rollins,

In 2004, Jimmy finally became the player the Phillies had been waiting for. He
batted .289/.348/.455, scored 119 runs, led the league in triples, cut down
considerably on his strikeouts, batted well from both sides of the plate, and
hit well in the clutch. The workouts with Gwynn had helped, but it was joining
morning sessions with (Bobby) Abreu that enabled him to sting the ball with
authority and consistency.[29]

Overall, he achieved another "quadruple-double" (home runs, stolen bases,
doubles, and triples in double figures in a single season), his first career
grand slam and posted career highs in a plethora of offensive categories
including batting average, slugging percentage, RBIs, and hits.[8]

Under new manager Charlie Manuel, whose offensive strategy predominantly
revolved around hitting lots of home runs, Rollins struggled to post a strong
batting average early in the Phillies' 2005 season.[29] Nevertheless, he was
again selected to the NL All-Star team.[8] His offensive strategy changed in
early August, when he began a hitting streak that spanned the season's final
36 games; during the streak, he hit .379.[8] It was the longest hitting streak
in Phillies' history, surpassing Ed Delahanty, whose streak lasted 31
games.[31][32] Throughout the streak, Rollins aspired to maintain a team-first
mentality, and noted that he would trade the streak for a playoff berth: "If
we lose and I keep the streak, what does that mean? The season is
automatically over. The playoffs is everything. That's what we all want."[33]
Ultimately, the Phillies missed the playoffs by one game.[34] Overall, Rollins
compiled his fourth career quadruple-double, tying Johnny Damon for most among
active players, and batted .290/.338/.431 with 12 home runs, 54 RBIs, and 41
stolen bases.[1][8]

The 2006 Phillies season began with much hype surrounding Rollins, and whether
he could extend his hitting streak to pass Joe DiMaggio's record 56
games.[35][36] He extended the streak two games into the season, but it ended
on April 6 when he failed to get a hit in a game against the St. Louis
Cardinals.[37][38] He struggled during the first half of the season, posting a
batting average of just .259, but rebounded during the second half, ultimately
posting strong cumulative numbers once again.[29] He became the third player
in Phillies' history to score at least 100 runs in three consecutive seasons
(Chuck Klein and Bobby Abreu), and led all NL shortstops in RBIs, runs scored,
extra-base hits, and total bases. He was just short, however, of another
quadruple-double. Cumulatively, he hit .277/.334/.478 with 25 home runs and 83
RBIs (at the time, the latter two were career-highs) and 36 stolen bases.[8]
Once again, the Phillies barely missed the playoffs.[39]

Before spring training, Rollins announced that the Phillies were the "Team to
Beat" in the National League East:

The Mets had a chance to win the World Series last year. Last year is over. I
think we are the team to beat in the NL East, finally. But, that's only on
paper.

It became a sports media sensation, especially given that the New York Mets
had won the division in 2006 with relative ease. The claim was widely
reported, often without the second part of the quote ("only on paper"). _USA
Today_ columnist Hal Bodley opined, "The Phillies have needed someone to light
a fire, especially in April. Rollins' bold, if not arrogant, prediction might
just do that."[41] During the first half of the season, it appeared Rollins
had spoken prematurely, as the Mets jumped out to an early divisional
lead.[29] On June 28, Rollins had a four-hit game against the Cincinnati Reds,
including a game-tying triple.[42] The triple was Rollins' 10th, which gave
him his fifth career "quadruple–double".[8]

In August, the Mets' lead began to dissipate, as the Phillies combined several
solid series; Rollins was a key component of their success.[43][44][45]
Rollins was named the National League Player of the Week for August 27 to
September 2, 2007.[8][46] On September 25 against the Atlanta Braves, Rollins
hit the home run that completed his 30–30 season.[47] On the last day of the
2007 season, Rollins became the seventh player to collect at least 20 doubles,
20 triples, and 20 home runs in one season when he hit his 20th triple of the
year in a 6–1 win over the Washington Nationals that clinched the National
League East division championship for the Phillies, which confirmed Rollins'
preseason assertion of the Phillies preeminence.[48]

For the 2007 season, he batted .296/.344/.531 and led the league in games
(162), at bats (716), runs (139), and triples (20), was second in hits (212),
total bases (380), extra base hits (88), and power-speed number (34.6), and
had 30 home runs, 94 RBIs, and 41 stolen bases (5th in the league).[49] The
club advanced to the playoffs for the first time since their 1993 World Series
loss; however, they were swept by the Colorado Rockies in the National League
Division Series.[50]

Rollins was named the National League's Most Valuable Player.[51][52] He also
received the NLBM Oscar Charleston Legacy Award (NL MVP), and won the first of
three consecutive Gold Glove Awards, becoming the first Phillies shortstop to
win a Gold Glove since Larry Bowa in 1978.[8] He was the first player in MLB
history to record 200 hits, 20 triples, 30 home runs, and 30 stolen bases in a
season.[53]

Unlike in spring training 2007, Rollins "made no guarantees heading into the
next season, but that didn't mean the Phillies weren't confident" entering
their 2008 season, despite the Mets' acquisition of Johan Santana and a "2007
Rollins-esque" guarantee of winning the division from Carlos Beltrán.[29]
After beginning the season by hitting a home run on opening day, Rollins
landed on the disabled list (DL) for the first time in his career in early
April, suffering an ankle sprain.[8] He returned in May, and had a
"productive" summer, ultimately posting a career-high 47 stolen bases,
notwithstanding his batting average dropping to .277, and his home run and RBI
totals dropping to 11 and 59 respectively.[8][29] In the postseason, Rollins
was a focal point of the team, which ultimately won the 2008 World Series; in
the division series (NLDS), he hit a leadoff home run in game four, and in the
championship series (NLCS), he hit a leadoff home run in game five, and
despite struggles early in the World Series, he eventually contributed with
strong situational hitting, helping the Phillies win the series in five
games.[8][29] At the conclusion of the season, Rollins was honored with a
Fielding Bible Award for defensive excellence as the top MLB shortstop during
the year.[54]

Rollins began 2009 by participating in the 2009 World Baseball Classic (WBC)
as a member of Team USA; he hit .417 and was named to the all-tournament
team.[55] After setting a career high in stolen bases in 2008, he did not
steal one in the season's first 17 games, his longest drought to begin a
season since 2004. On May 21, he reached the 1500-hit milestone in a game
against the Cincinnati Reds.[8] As of the end of June, however, he was hitting
just .205 (he went 28 consecutive at-bats without a hit from the end of June
until July 2),[8] and was benched for four games by Charlie Manuel in an
effort to encourage him to regain the shorter, lower half-driven swing that he
used in his 2007 MVP campaign.[56] He did improve in the second half of the
season, batting .288 from July 3 to the end of the year. Overall, he compiled
an NL-leading 672 at-bats, finished fourth in doubles (43) and stolen bases
(31), and tenth in runs (100); in addition, he had a .250 batting average, 21
home runs (five of which were leadoff, the most in his career), and 77 RBIs,
also winning the National League Gold Glove award for shortstops. In the
postseason, he helped the Phillies reach the 2009 World Series by hitting a
walk-off double in game four of the NLCS.[8] The Phillies failed to repeat as
champions, however. They lost to the New York Yankees.[57]

Rollins's 2010 season was marked by injuries; he missed a total of 74 games,
playing in only 88, the lowest total of his major league career.[8] While
warming up in the outfield prior to the Phillies' game on April 12, he
strained his right calf, and eventually was placed on the disabled list.[58]
He spent April 13–May 16, and May 22–June 21 on the DL with that injury;
Wilson Valdez served as his backup.[59] When he returned, he hit his first
career walk-off home run on June 23, powering the Phillies to a 7–6 victory
over the Cleveland Indians.[60] On July 3, he hit his 150th career home run in
a game against the Pittsburgh Pirates, and on October 1, he hit his third
career grand slam in a game against the Atlanta Braves.[8] Overall, he hit
.243 with eight home runs and 41 RBIs.[1] He maintained his strong defense
despite poor offense, but after his third consecutive mediocre offensive
season, some questioned whether his MVP campaign in 2007 was a fluke.[59]

2011 was a contract year for Rollins, and his performance concurrently
rebounded, insofar as he improved his batting average, and home run and RBI
totals.[8][59] He made his 11th consecutive opening day start, and, for the
first time in several seasons, he was healthy at the beginning of the season,
starting the season's first 49 games. Nevertheless, it took him 54 plate
appearances to record his first RBI, the longest drought of his career. On
July 20, for the second time in his career, he had a multi-home run game in
which one home run came batting right-handed and the other left-handed, the
first Phillies player to do it multiple times.[8] His season was not entirely
devoid of injuries; on August 22, a right groin strain landed him on the DL,
causing him to miss 18 games.[61] He returned in time for the playoffs, and
set several Phillies records in the 2011 NLDS, including hits (9), doubles
(4), and multi-hit games (4).[8] Despite the records, the Phillies lost the
series to the St. Louis Cardinals.[62] Overall, he posted a .268 batting
average with 16 home runs and 63 RBIs.[1] At the season's conclusion, Rollins
was selected as the shortstop on the _MLB Insiders Club Magazine_ All-
Postseason Team.[63] On December 17, 2011, Rollins signed a three-year, $33
million deal with a vesting option for a fourth year, worth another $11
million.[64] The option vested when he reached 1,100 plate appearances in
2013-14.[65]

In 2012, Rollins epitomized the Phillies' general "averageness" by posting a
.250 batting average with 23 home runs and 68 RBIs.[66] He hit poorly in the
beginning of the season, and did not hit a home run until his 136th at bat of
the season, the second-longest it had ever taken him to hit a home run at the
beginning of a season.[8][67] He missed three games from May 21–23 for the
birth of his first daughter. On July 31, he hit his fourth career inside-the-
park home run, which led active players.[8] His hitting improved over the
latter half of the season,[67] and in September, he hit eight home runs.[8] He
missed the final three games of the season with a calf strain. During the
season, he joined Craig Biggio, Barry Larkin, and Paul Molitor as the only
players in MLB history to record 2000 hits, 350 stolen bases, and 150 home
runs as a member of one team. It was his fourth career season during which he
hit at least 20 home runs and stole 30 bases, which trailed only Bobby and
Barry Bonds.[8]

Prior to the 2013 season, Rollins played for Team USA in the 2013 World
Baseball Classic (WBC), and was the only player from Team USA to make the
event's all-star team; it was his second WBC, and second placement on the all-
star team.[68] He was back to the Phillies in time for opening day, and made
his 13th consecutive start on opening day. Overall, he tied for fifth in the
NL in games (160), and led the team with 600 at-bats, 151 hits, 36 doubles,
and 59 walks. He achieved several career milestones during the season,
including his 800th RBI (April 22), his 433 double (breaking Ed Delahanty's
record on May 15), and his 45th career leadoff home run (fourth most in MLB
history; hit on July 20).[8] Despite the achievements, overall, the season was
a decline from previous years; his isolated power (ISO) was among the worst in
the major leagues, he attempted to steal the fewest bases in his career, and
his defense "tanked" according to fielding metrics.[69] He "struggled
mightily" and ultimately posted a .252 batting average with six home runs and
39 RBIs.[8] which "could be the beginning of his decline as an effective Major
League hitter".[70]

Rollins attracted media attention in the offseason prior to 2014 when he
supposedly expressed disinclination or lack of motivation after commenting
"who cares" in regards to spring training; Buster Olney penned a column
suggesting that there was a sentiment within the Phillies' organization that
he should be traded (the rumors were dispelled by Rollins and Phillies general
manager Rubén Amaro, Jr. as ridiculous).[71][72] He opened the season by
hitting a grand slam against the Texas Rangers, which was also his 200th
career home run.[73] After two games, Rollins left the team on paternity leave
to be with his wife as the couple had their second child.[74] On April 12, he
hit a walk-off home run against the Miami Marlins.[75] On June 14, Rollins
singled to right field for his 2,235th hit to surpass Mike Schmidt as the
Phillies' all-time leader in hits. The game paused as Schmidt and the
remainder of the Phillies congratulated Rollins at first base.[76][77]
Following the season, Rollins became the first ever co-winner of the Roberto
Clemente Award when he and recently retired Chicago White Sox captain Paul
Konerko being announced as the awards' recipients.[78]

On December 19, 2014, Rollins was traded to the Los Angeles Dodgers in
exchange for minor league pitchers Tom Windle and Zach Eflin.[79] Rollins
waived his no-trade clause and stated that he was expecting to take on a
leadership position with his new team.[80]

Rollins played his first game with the Dodgers during opening day against the
San Diego Padres on April 6, 2015, hitting a 3-run homer off of Shawn Kelley,
giving the Dodgers a 6-3 victory over the Padres.[81] He struggled offensively
with the Dodgers, hitting a career low .224 (the lowest batting average among
all qualified major league batters)/.285/.358 with 13 homers and 41 RBI.[82]
He also stole 12 bases.[83] In September, he lost his starting job to rookie
Corey Seager.[84] For the final game of the season, manager Don Mattingly
designated Rollins to be the 2015 player manager.[85]

On February 22, 2016, Rollins signed a minor league contract with the Chicago
White Sox that included an invitation to major league spring training. He
competed with Tyler Saladino for a starting role at shortstop.[86] At the end
of spring training, the team announced that Rollins would serve as their
Opening Day shortstop.[87]

Rollins batted .221/.295/.329 with 2 home runs and 5 stolen bases in 41 games
for the White Sox.[49] On June 10, he was designated for assignment so the
White Sox could promote Tim Anderson from the minor leagues.[88]

On December 19, 2016, Rollins signed a minor league contract with the San
Francisco Giants that included an invitation to spring training.[89] He was
released on March 31, 2017.[90]

Rollins through 2018 was 20th all-time among MLB players in career power-speed
number (309.8), 31st in stolen base percentage (81.74), 42nd in assists
(6,139), and 46th in stolen bases (470).[1] In his career, he led the National
League four times in triples, and once each in runs, stolen bases, and stolen
base percentage.[1] As of 2018, he was the Phillies career leader in at bats
(8,628), hits (3,206), doubles (479), and power-speed number (292.5), second
in games played (2,090) and stolen bases (453), and third in runs (1,325),
triples (111), and stolen base percentage (82.66).[2]

In 2019, Rollins returned to the Phillies in two separate capacities: in
January, as a special advisor for the team;[91] and in March, as an on-air
commentator for their television broadcasts.[92] On May 4, 2019, a retirement
ceremony honoring Rollins was held at Citizens Bank Park.[93][94]

Growing up, Rollins admired Rickey Henderson, one of the best leadoff hitters
in MLB history, and especially early in his career, he sought to emulate
Henderson at the plate.[23] This contributed to his propensity to swing early
in the count, and chase high pitches, seeking to hit home runs rather than get
on base, the stereotypical role of a leadoff hitter.[95] Consequently, he
struggled to make contact with the ball, striking out too much, and rarely
walking.[21][23] To help alleviate those predominantly negative tendencies, he
worked with Tony Gwynn, Sr. prior to the 2003 season on using the whole field,
and hitting more ground balls than pop-ups.[24] Overall, he "always had a hard
time accepting that he is vertically challenged at 5-foot-8", which
contributed to his inclination to strive to hit for power rather than contact,
and to seek to pull the ball rather than use the whole field.[96] Rollins is
the Phillies all-time leader in hits, and has the second-most stolen bases in
Phillies history.[2][97]

A "supreme defensive shortstop", Rollins won four Gold Glove Awards, and only
Omar Vizquel has a better fielding percentage among shortstops who played at
least 10 seasons.[98] Rollins attributes some of his defensive prowess to
experience, noting that he played in MLB for a long enough time to know most
hitters' tendencies and to learn how to read swings, both of which helped him
appropriately position himself to get to as many balls as possible.[98] In
their 2011 season preview, Lindy's Sports commented that Rollins was an upper-
echelon shortstop "with soft hands, excellent agility and plus range left and
right" and praised his strong throwing arm, especially from the hole.[99]

Rollins resides in the Tampa, Florida, area[100] and is married to Johari
Smith. They were married on January 23, 2010, in the Cayman Islands.[101] On
May 21, 2012, Johari gave birth to the couple's first daughter, Camryn Drew
Rollins.[102] Their second daughter, Logan Aliya, was born in early April
2014.[103] When he played for the Phillies, Rollins resided in Woolwich
Township, New Jersey.[104] Osiris Johnson, a cousin of Rollins, is also a
baseball player, and was drafted in the second round, 37th overall in the 2018
draft by the Miami Marlins.[105]

An active philanthropist, Rollins and his wife Johari have participated in
several charitable endeavors including the creation of The Johari & Jimmy
Rollins Center for Animal Rehabilitation, which is located in Woolwich
Township, New Jersey, and provides several medical rehabilitation services for
animals[106] and an annual BaseBOWL charity bowling tournament to benefit the
Arthritis Foundation.[107] Rollins is also active politically and campaigned
for Barack Obama in the 2008 presidential election.[108]

Rollins is an investor for esports team NRG Esports.[109]

