**John Christopher Vukovich** (July 31, 1947 â€“ March 8, 2007), nicknamed "
**Vuk** " or " **Johnny Vuk** ", was an American professional baseball utility
infielder, manager, and coach in Major League Baseball (MLB)[1], best known
for his years with the Philadelphia Phillies.[2] He played in parts of ten
seasons between 1970 and 1981 for the Phillies, Cincinnati Reds, and Milwaukee
Brewers. Vukovich is also known for recording the lowest career MLB batting
average (BA) (.161) of any non-pitcher with 500 or more at bats (AB).

Vukovich was born in Sacramento, California and grew up in Sutter Creek,
California. His father was the baseball coach for the local Amador High School
where Vukovich attended. He was a backup for the 1975 Reds World Series-
winning team, although he was traded back to the Phillies before the playoffs
began, and also for the 1980 Phillies World Series-winning team.[1] He
actually began the 1975 season as the Reds' starting third baseman,[1] but was
benched in favor of Pete Rose so that the Reds could get outfielder George
Foster's bat into the lineup every day.[ _citation needed_ ] He batted above
.200 only twice in his ten-year career, appearing in 277 games while batting
.161 with 6 home runs and 44 runs batted in, and had a .956 fielding
percentage.[1] During his second period of playing with the Phillies, he
became beloved to the fans even though he seldom appeared in games; he was
seen as a blue-collar player and the ordinary fan respected his effort.[
_citation needed_ ] After his playing career ended, he joined the Chicago Cubs
as a coach, and in 1986 he was manager for a day after Jim Frey was fired (he
split that day's doubleheader). In 1987, he rejoined the Phillies, and after
Lee Elia was fired with nine games to go, he took over as skipper, going 5-4
the rest of the season.[2]

Vukovich stayed with the Phillies as a coach from 1988 to 2004, and was
considered for the managing job when Terry Francona was fired in 2000. The job
eventually went to Vukovich's childhood friend, Larry Bowa.[2] Vukovich was
diagnosed with a brain tumor early in the 2001 season and subsequently had
surgery. He would return later that season, and remained on the coaching staff
until being named special assistant to the General Manager following the 2004
season. Along with Bowa and Milt Thompson, Vukovich is one of just three
Phillies to go to the World Series as both a player and coach for the club.

In late 2006, he again exhibited symptoms; he died at Thomas Jefferson
Hospital in Philadelphia at age 59. The 2007 Phillies honored him by wearing a
uniform patch on their right sleeve with his nickname, "Vuk".[3]

Vukovich was a resident of Voorhees Township, New Jersey.[4]

