**John Vliet Lindsay** (/vliːt/; November 24, 1921 – December 19, 2000) was an
American politician, lawyer, and broadcaster. During his political career,
Lindsay was a U.S. congressman, mayor of New York City, and candidate for U.S.
president. He was also a regular guest host of _Good Morning America_. Lindsay
served as a member of the United States House of Representatives from January
1959 to December 1965 and as mayor of New York City from January 1966 to
December 1973. He switched from the Republican to the Democratic Party in
1971, and launched a brief and unsuccessful bid for the 1972 Democratic
presidential nomination as well as the 1980 Democratic nomination for Senator
from New York. He died from Parkinson's disease and pneumonia in Hilton Head
Island, South Carolina on December 19, 2000.

Lindsay was born in New York City on West End Avenue, to George Nelson Lindsay
and the former Florence Eleanor Vliet.[1] He grew up in an upper-middle-class
family of English and Dutch descent.[2] Lindsay's paternal grandfather
migrated to the United States in the 1880s from the Isle of Wight,[1] and his
mother was from an upper-middle-class family that had been in New York since
the 1660s.[2] Lindsay's father was a successful lawyer and investment
banker.[1] Lindsay attended the Buckley School, St. Paul's School and Yale,[1]
where he was admitted to the class of 1944 and joined Scroll and Key.[3]

With the outbreak of World War II, Lindsay completed his studies early and in
1943 joined the United States Navy as a gunnery officer. He obtained the rank
of lieutenant, earning five battle stars through action in the invasion of
Sicily and a series of landings in the Pacific theater.[4][5] After the war,
he spent a few months as a ski bum[2] and a couple of months training as a
bank clerk[2] before returning to New Haven, where he received his law degree
from Yale Law School in 1948, ahead of schedule.[2] In 1949, he began his
legal career at the law firm of Webster, Sheffield, Fleischmann, Hitchcock &
Chrystie.[6]

Back in New York City, Lindsay met his future wife, Mary Anne Harrison
(1926-2004), at the wedding of Nancy Walker Bush (daughter of Connecticut's
Senator Prescott Bush and sister of future President George Herbert Walker
Bush),[2] where he was an usher and Harrison a bridesmaid.[2] She was a
graduate of Vassar College[3] and a distant relative of William Henry Harrison
and Benjamin Harrison.[2] They married in 1949.[3] That same year Lindsay was
admitted to the bar, and rose to become a partner in his law firm four years
later.[5]

Lindsay began gravitating toward politics as one of the founders of the Youth
for Eisenhower club in 1951 and as president of The New York Young Republican
Club in 1952.[7] He went on to join the United States Department of Justice in
1955 as executive assistant to Attorney General Herbert Brownell. There he
worked on civil liberties cases as well as the 1957 Civil Rights Act. In 1958,
with the backing of Brownell as well as Bruce Barton, John Aspinwall
Roosevelt, and Edith Willkie,[2] Lindsay won the Republican primary and went
on to be elected to Congress as the representative of the "Silk Stocking" 17th
district, exemplified by Manhattan's Upper East Side but also encompassing the
diverse Lower East Side and historically bohemian Greenwich Village.[7]

While in Congress, Lindsay established a liberal voting record increasingly at
odds with his own party.[8] He was an early supporter of federal aid to
education and Medicare;[2] and advocated the establishment of a federal United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development and a National Foundation
for the Arts and Humanities.[2] He was called a maverick,[1] casting the lone
dissenting vote for a Republican-sponsored bill extending the power of the
Postmaster General to impound obscene mail[2] and one of only two dissenting
votes for a bill allowing federal interception of mail from Communist
countries.[2] Also known for his wit, when asked by his party leaders why he
opposed legislation to combat Communism and pornography, he replied that the
two were the major industries of his district and if they were suppressed then
"the 17th district would be a depressed area".[5]

In 1965, Lindsay was elected Mayor of New York City as a Republican with the
support of the Liberal Party of New York in a three-way race. He defeated
Democratic mayoral candidate Abraham D. Beame, then City Comptroller, as well
as _National Review_ founder William F. Buckley, Jr., who ran on the
Conservative line. The unofficial motto of the campaign, taken from a Murray
Kempton column, was "He is fresh and everyone else is tired".[2][9]

On his first day as mayor, January 1, 1966, the Transport Workers Union of
America, led by Mike Quill shut down the city with a complete halt of subway
and bus service. As New Yorkers endured the transit strike, Lindsay remarked,
"I still think it's a fun city," and walked four miles (6 km) from his hotel
room to City Hall in a gesture to show it.[10] Dick Schaap, then a columnist
for the _New York Herald Tribune_ , popularized the term in an article titled
_Fun City_.[10][11] In the article, Schaap sardonically pointed out that it
wasn't.[10][11]

In 1966 the settlement terms of the transit strike, combined with increased
welfare costs and general economic decline, forced Lindsay to lobby the New
York State legislature for a new municipal income tax and higher water rates
for city residents, plus a new commuter tax for people who worked in the city
but resided elsewhere.

The transit strike was the first of many labor struggles. In 1968, in an
attempt to decentralize the city's school system, Lindsay granted three local
school boards in the city complete control over their schools, in an effort to
allow communities to have more of a say in their schools. The city's teachers
union, the United Federation of Teachers, however, saw the breakup as a way of
union busting, as a decentralized school system would force the union to
negotiate with 33 separate school boards rather than with one centralized
body. As a result, in May 1968 several teachers working in schools located in
the neighborhood of Ocean Hill-Brownsville, one of the neighborhoods where the
decentralization was being tested, were fired from their jobs by the
community-run school board. The UFT demanded the reinstatement of the
dismissed teachers, citing that the teachers had been fired without due
process. When their demands were ignored, the UFT called the first of three
strikes, leading ultimately to a protracted citywide teachers' strike that
stretched over a seven-month period between May and November.[12] The strike
was tinged with racial and anti-Semitic overtones, pitting black and Puerto
Rican parents against Jewish teachers and supervisors.[13] Many thought the
mayor had made a bad situation worse by taking sides against the teachers.[13]
The episode left a legacy of tensions between blacks and Jews that went on for
years,[1] and Lindsay called it his greatest regret.[1]

That same year, 1968, also saw a three-day Broadway strike and a nine-day
sanitation strike.[14] Quality of life in the city reached a nadir during the
sanitation strike as mounds of garbage caught fire and strong winds blew the
filth through the streets.[15] In June 1968, the New York City Police
Department deployed snipers to protect Lindsay during a public ceremony,
shortly after they detained a knife-wielding man who had demanded to meet the
mayor.[16] With the schools shut down, police engaged in a slowdown,
firefighters threatening job actions, the city awash in garbage, and racial
and religious tensions breaking to the surface, Lindsay later called the last
six months of 1968 "the worst of my public life."[1]

The summer of 1971 ushered in another devastating strike as over 8,000 workers
belonging to AFSCME District Council 37 walked off their jobs for two days.
The strikers included the operators of the city's drawbridges and sewage
treatment plants. Drawbridges over the Harlem River were locked in the "up"
position, barring automobile travel into Manhattan, and hundreds of thousands
of gallons of raw sewage flowed into local waterways.

Lindsay served on the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, known
as the Kerner Commission. This body was established in 1967 by President
Johnson after riots in urban centers of the US, including Newark and Detroit.
Lindsay maximized publicity and coverage of his activities on the commission,
and while other commissioners made inconspicuous visits to riot-damaged sites,
Lindsay would alert the press before his fact-finding missions. Nonetheless,
he was especially influential in producing the Kerner Report; its dramatic
language of the nation "moving toward two societies, one black, one
white—separate and unequal" was his rhetoric.[17]

President Lyndon B. Johnson ignored the report and rejected the Kerner
Commission's recommendations.[18] In April 1968, one month after the release
of the Kerner report, rioting broke out in more than 100 cities following the
assassination of civil rights leader Martin Luther King, Jr. [19] However, in
New York City, Lindsay traveled directly into Harlem, telling black residents
that he regretted King's death and was working against poverty. He is credited
with averting riots in the city with this direct response, even as other major
cities burned.[20][21] David Garth, who accompanied Lindsay that night,
recalled: "There was a wall of people coming across 125th Street, going from
west to east ... I thought we were dead. John raised his hands, said he was
sorry. It was very quiet. My feeling was, his appearance there was very
reassuring to people because it wasn't the first time they had seen him. He
had gone there on a regular basis. That gave him credibility when it hit the
fan."[22]

On February 10, 1969, New York City was pummeled with 15 inches (38 cm) of
snow. On the first day alone, 14 people died and 68 were injured.[23] Within a
day, the mayor was criticized for giving favored treatment to Manhattan at the
expense of the other boroughs.[24] Charges were made that a city worker
elicited a bribe to clean streets in Queens.[25]

Over a week later, streets in eastern Queens still had remained unplowed by
the city, enraging the borough's residents, many who felt that the city's
other boroughs always took a back seat to Manhattan.[26] Lindsay traveled to
Queens, but his visit was not well received. His car could not make its way
through Rego Park, and even in a four-wheel-drive truck, he had trouble
getting around.[27] In Kew Gardens Hills, the mayor was booed; one woman
screamed, "You should be ashamed of yourself."[27] In Fresh Meadows, a woman
told the mayor: "Get away, you bum."[27] Later during his walk through Fresh
Meadows, another woman called him 'a wonderful man", prompting the mayor to
respond: "And you're a wonderful woman, not like those fat Jewish broads up
there," pointing to women in a nearby building who had criticized him.[27]

The blizzard, dubbed the "Lindsay Snowstorm",[28] prompted a political crisis
that became "legendary in the annals of municipal politics"[27] as the scenes
conveyed a message that the mayor of New York City was indifferent to the
middle class and poor citizens of the city.[1]

In 1969, a backlash against Lindsay caused him to lose the Republican mayoral
primary to state Senator John J. Marchi, who was enthusiastically supported by
Buckley and the party's conservative wing. In the Democratic primary, the most
conservative candidate, City Comptroller Mario Procaccino, defeated several
more liberal contenders and won the nomination with only a plurality of the
votes. "The more the Mario", he quipped.[29] Procaccino, who ran to Lindsay's
right, went on to coin the term "limousine liberal" to describe Lindsay and
his wealthy Manhattan backers.

Despite losing the Republican nomination, Lindsay remained on the ballot as
the candidate of the New York Liberal Party. In his campaign he said "mistakes
were made" and called being mayor of New York City "the second toughest job in
America."[30][31] Two television advertisements described his position: In one
he looked directly into the camera and said, "I guessed wrong on the weather
before the city's biggest snowfall last winter. And that was a mistake. But I
put 6,000 more cops on the streets. And that was no mistake. The school strike
went on too long and we all made some mistakes. But I brought 225,000 more
jobs to this town. And that was no mistake... And we did not have a Detroit, a
Watts or Newark. And those were no mistakes. The things that go wrong are what
make this the second toughest job in America. But the things that go right are
those things that make me want it." The second opened with a drive through the
Holland Tunnel from lower Manhattan toward New Jersey and suggested that,
"Every New Yorker should take this trip at least once before election day..."
followed by video of Newark, New Jersey which had been devastated by race
riots.[32]

While narrowly losing Brooklyn and the Bronx due to Procaccino's entrenched
support among ethnic, working class whites (with Marchi winning his native
Staten Island), Lindsay was able to vanquish his opponents with support from
three distinct groups.[33] First were the city's minorities, mostly African
Americans and Puerto Ricans, who were concentrated in Harlem, the South Bronx
and various Brooklyn neighborhoods, including Bedford-Stuyvesant and
Brownsville.[33][34] Second were the white and economically secure residents
of certain areas of Manhattan.[33][34] Third were the whites in the boroughs
outside Manhattan who had a similar educational background and "cosmopolitan"
attitude, namely residents of solidly middle-class neighborhoods, including
Forest Hills and Kew Gardens in Queens and Brooklyn Heights in Brooklyn.[33]
This third category included many traditionally Democratic Jewish Americans
who were repelled by Procaccino's conservatism. This created a plurality
coalition (42%) in Lindsay's second three-way race. His margin of victory rose
from just over 100,000 more votes than his Democratic opponent in 1965 to over
180,000 votes over Procaccino in 1969, despite appearing on just one third
party ballot line (see New York City Mayoral Elections).[33][34]

On May 8, 1970, near the intersection of Wall Street and Broad Street and at
New York City Hall, a riot started when about 200 construction workers
mobilized by the New York State AFL-CIO labor federation attacked about 1,000
high school and college students and others protesting the Kent State
shootings, the Cambodian Campaign, and the Vietnam War. Some attorneys,
bankers, and investment analysts from nearby Wall Street investment firms
tried to protect many of the students but were themselves attacked, and some
onlookers reported that the police stood by and did nothing. Although more
than seventy people were injured, including four policemen, only six people
were arrested.[35][36][37] The following day, Lindsay severely criticized the
police for their lack of action.[38] Police Department labor leaders later
accused Lindsay of "undermining the confidence of the public in its Police
Department" by his statements[39] and blamed the inaction on inadequate
preparations and "inconsistent directives" in the past from the Mayor's
office.[40] Several thousand construction workers, longshoremen and white-
collar workers protested against the mayor on May 11 and again on May 16.
Protesters called Lindsay "the red mayor", "traitor", "Commie rat", and "bum".
The Mayor described the mood of the city as "taut".[41][42]

In 1970, _The New York Times_ printed New York City Police Department
Patrolman Frank Serpico's claims of widespread police corruption. As a result,
the Knapp Commission was eventually formed that April by Lindsay, with
investigations beginning in June, although public hearings did not start until
October 18, 1971. Its preliminary report was not issued until August 1972, and
final recommendations only released on December 27, 1972.

In 1971, Lindsay and his wife cut ties with the Republican Party by
registering with the Democratic Party. Lindsay said, "In a sense, this step
recognizes the failure of 20 years in progressive Republican politics. In
another sense, it represents the renewed decision to fight for new national
leadership."[43] Lindsay then launched a brief and unsuccessful bid for the
1972 Democratic presidential nomination. He attracted positive media attention
and was a successful fundraiser. Lindsay did well in the early Arizona caucus,
coming in second place[44] behind Edmund Muskie of Maine and ahead of eventual
nominee George McGovern of South Dakota. Then in the March 14 Florida primary,
he placed a weak fifth place, behind George Wallace of Alabama, Muskie, Hubert
Humphrey of Minnesota, and Scoop Jackson of Washington (though he did edge out
McGovern).[45] Among his difficulties was New York City's worsening problems,
which Lindsay was accused of neglecting; a band of protesters from Forest
Hills, Queens, who were opposed to his support for a low income housing
project in their neighborhood, followed Lindsay around his aborted campaign
itinerary to jeer and heckle him.[46][47] His poor showing in Florida
effectively doomed his candidacy. Shortly thereafter, influential Brooklyn
Democratic Party chairman Meade Esposito called for Lindsay to end his
campaign: "I think the handwriting is on the wall; Little Sheba better come
home."[48] After a poor showing in the April 5 Wisconsin primary, Lindsay
formally abandoned the race.

In a 1972 Gallup poll, 60% of New Yorkers felt Lindsay's administration was
working poorly, nine percent rated it good, and not one person thought its
performance excellent.[49] By 1978, _The New York Times_ called Lindsay "an
exile in his own city".[50]

Lindsay's record remained controversial after he left politics. Conservative
historian Fred Siegel, calling Lindsay the worst New York City mayor of the
20th century, said "Lindsay wasn't incompetent or foolish or corrupt, but he
was actively destructive".[51] Journalist Steven Weisman observed "Lindsay's
congressional career had taught him little of the need for subtle bureaucratic
maneuvering, for understanding an opponent's self-interest, or for the great
patience required in a sprawling government."[52]

Lindsay's budget aide Peter C. Goldmark, Jr. told historian Vincent Cannato
that the administration "failed to come to grips with what a neighborhood is.
We never realized that crime is something that happens to, and in, a
community." Assistant Nancy Seifer said "There was a whole world out there
that nobody in City Hall knew anything about ... If you didn't live on Central
Park West, you were some kind of lesser being."[53] While many experts traced
the city's mid-1970s fiscal crisis to the Lindsay years, Lindsay disagreed,
insisting that it may have come sooner if he had not imposed new taxes.[1]

An alternate assessment was made by journalist Robert McFadden who said that
"By 1973, his last year in office, Mr. Lindsay had become a more seasoned,
pragmatic mayor."[1] McFadden also credited him for reducing racial tensions,
leading to the prevention of riots that plagued Detroit, Los Angeles, Newark
and other cities.[1]

Mario Cuomo, Carl McCall, and Carter F. Bales were among the many people who
started their careers in public service in the Lindsay administration.[54]
Rev. Al Sharpton has said that he still remembers Lindsay having walked the
streets of Bedford-Stuyvesant and Harlem when these neighborhoods were doing
poorly economically.[54]

Lindsay also fought to transform the Civilian Complaint Review Board from an
internal police-run department, into a public-minded agency with a citizen
majority board.[55] Initially and vociferously opposed by the police union,
citizen oversight of police—which sprung from the American Civil Rights
Movement—has since become an established institution in civic life, and
Lindsay was a leader for it.

Lindsay left a serious legacy in the development of the Arts in Brooklyn and
Lower Manhattan. By instructing code enforcement officers to basically "go
light" on squatters and especially artists "live/work" space, he helped send
signals that aided in the revival of the arts community in those segments of
the city.

After leaving office, Lindsay returned to the law, but remained in the public
eye as a commentator and regular guest host for ABC's _Good Morning America_.
In 1975, Lindsay made a surprise appearance on _The Tony Awards_ telecast in
which he, along with a troupe of celebrity male suitors in tuxedos, sang
"Mame" to Angela Lansbury. He presented the award for Best Director Of A Play
to John Dexter for the play _Equus_. Lindsay also tried his hand at acting,
appearing in Otto Preminger's _Rosebud_ ;[56] the following year his novel,
_The Edge_ , was published (Lindsay had earlier authored two non-fiction
memoirs): _New York Times_ , in its contemporary review of the novel, said it
was "as dead-serious as a $100-a-plate dinner of gray meat and frozen
candidates' smiles."[57] Attempting a political comeback in 1980, Lindsay made
a long-shot bid for the Democratic nomination for U.S. Senator from New York,
and finished third. He was also active in New York City charities, serving on
the board of the Association for a Better New York, and as chairman of the
Lincoln Center Theater. On his death, _New York Times_ credited Lindsay with a
significant role in the rejuvenation of the theatre.[58]

Medical bills from his Parkinson's disease, heart attacks, and stroke depleted
Lindsay's finances, as did the collapse of two law firms where he worked, and
he found himself without health insurance. Lindsay's eight years of service as
Mayor left him seven years short of qualifying for a city pension. In 1996,
with support from City Council Speaker Peter Vallone, Mayor Rudolph W.
Giuliani appointed Lindsay to two largely ceremonial posts to make him
eligible for municipal health insurance coverage.[59] He and his wife Mary
moved to a retirement community in Hilton Head Island, South Carolina, in
November 1999, where he died on December 19, 2000 at the age of seventy-nine
of complications from pneumonia and Parkinson's disease.[36]

In 2000, Yale Law School created a fellowship program named in Lindsay's
honor. In 1998, a park in Brooklyn, Lindsay Triangle, was named in his
honor,[60] and in 2001, the East River Park was renamed in his memory.[61] In
December 2013, South Loop Drive in Manhattan's Central Park was renamed after
Lindsay, to commemorate his support for a car-free Central Park.[62]

He was featured on a poster picture with Governor Rockefeller at the
groundbreaking of the former World Trade Center in the city history section of
the Museum of the City of New York at Fifth Avenue and 103rd Street.

