**John Francis Coleman** (March 6, 1863 – May 31, 1922) was an American
professional baseball pitcher and outfielder. From 1883 through 1890, Coleman
played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Philadelphia Quakers (now the
Phillies), the Pittsburgh Alleghenys (now the Pirates), and the now-defunct
Philadelphia Athletics.

Remarkably, in his rookie season, he pitched in 65 games, but accumulated a
record of only 12-48 (the team's season record was 17-81, with its batting
average of only .240, lowest in the league). He appeared in another 32 games
as an outfielder and second baseman. As of 2010, his 48 losses, 772 hits given
up, 510 runs allowed, and 291 earned runs allowed over that 98-game season
remain single-season major-league records. These records stand out by large
margins, as his nearest contenders are Will White with 42 losses and 404 runs
allowed; Ted Breitenstein with 238 earned runs; and Bobby Mathews with 693
hits. His difference between wins and losses, 36, is also the largest ever,
dwarfing George Cobb's 27. His 61 games started, 59 complete games, and 538⅓
innings pitched remain Phillies single-season records as well.[1]

After that season, Coleman played mainly as an outfielder, but occasionally
filled in at first and second bases and on the pitcher's mound. His career
pitching record was 23-72, and his career batting average was .257.

Coleman died after being hit by an automobile in Detroit It was so bad it
fractured his skull according to death records Detroit, Michigan.

Jamie Moyer, Phillies pitcher in 2007, the year the team became the first
sports team of any kind to reach 10,000 losses, on being asked what his
forebear Coleman might have said after suffering the very first loss in that
long chain, 4-3 to the Providence Grays in 1883, replied: "I hope this doesn't
start a trend!"[2]

