**Joshua Holt Hamilton** (born May 21, 1981) is an American former
professional baseball outfielder. He played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for
the Cincinnati Reds (2007), Texas Rangers (2008-2012, 2015), and Los Angeles
Angels of Anaheim (2013–2014). Hamilton is a five-time MLB All-Star and won
the American League Most Valuable Player Award (MVP) in 2010.

Josh Hamilton was the first overall pick in the 1999 MLB draft by the Tampa
Bay Devil Rays.[1] He was considered a blue chip prospect until injuries and a
drug addiction derailed his career beginning in 2001. Prior to the 2007
season, Hamilton was selected by the Chicago Cubs (picking for the Reds) in
the Rule 5 draft.[2] During the off-season he was traded to the Rangers.

During the 2008 season, Hamilton was named to the AL All-Star team. He also
participated in the Home Run Derby, where he hit a record 28 home runs in the
opening round and finished with 35 home runs, which was second-most all-time
in derby history.[3][4] He made the All-Star team the next four seasons as
well. In 2012, Hamilton received more votes than any other player on the All-
Star Game ballot, besting by approximately 3.5 million votes the vote count
set in 2011 by José Bautista.[5] Hamilton won the AL batting title in 2010. On
October 22, 2010, Hamilton was selected as MVP of the 2010 ALCS. On November
23, 2010, Hamilton was named the 2010 AL MVP, earning 22 of 28 first-place
votes.[6] On May 8, 2012, Hamilton became the 16th player in MLB history to
hit four home runs in a game. All four home runs were two-run home runs, and
he set an AL record for total bases in a game with 18.[7]

Hamilton was born and grew up in Raleigh, North Carolina, playing little
league baseball alongside former South Carolina and Oakland Athletics catcher
Landon Powell.[8] Hamilton attended Athens Drive High School in Raleigh where
he starred as both a pitcher and outfielder. As a high school senior, Hamilton
ran the 60-yard dash in 6.7 seconds and was clocked at 97 miles per hour (156
km/h) on the mound. After hitting .529 in 25 games with 13 home runs, 20
stolen bases, 35 runs batted in (RBIs), and 34 runs scored, Hamilton was
widely considered one of the top two prospects for the 1999 MLB draft, along
with Josh Beckett, a Texas high school product.[9] Hamilton initially signed a
letter of intent to play college baseball for North Carolina State.[10]

The Tampa Bay Devil Rays owned the number one pick and on selected Hamilton
with the first overall selection. Hamilton signed with Tampa Bay, receiving a
$3.96 million signing bonus, and joined their minor league system.[1][11] His
first stop in the minors was the rookie level Princeton Devil Rays of the
Appalachian League, where he played 56 games. He later joined the Short Season
Single-A club, the Hudson Valley Renegades, and helped lead them to their
first New York–Penn League championship. He spent the 2000 season with the
Charleston RiverDogs in the South Atlantic League. Hamilton enjoyed a breakout
season where he hit .301 in 96 games, with 13 home runs and 61 RBIs. He was
also selected to the South Atlantic League All Star game and took home MVP
honors after going 2–6 with two triples and two runs scored.[12] In addition,
Hamilton was named to the 2000 All-Star Futures Game, a game designed to
showcase minor league prospects. Hamilton was also voted Minor League Player
of the Year by _USA Today_.[13] At the start of his pro career, Hamilton's
parents quit their jobs so they could travel with their son.[14]

Prior to the 2001 season, Hamilton was involved in an automobile accident. His
mother and father were also injured but recovered. The 2001 season marked the
beginning of his drug and alcohol use, and he made his first attempt at
rehabilitation.[14] Hamilton only played 45 games in the 2001 season, split
between Charleston (A-Ball) and the Orlando Rays, a Double-A team in the
Southern League. Hamilton began the 2002 season with the Bakersfield Blaze,
batting .303 with nine home runs and 44 RBIs in 56 games before his season
came to an end due to lingering toe and neck injuries.[13] The Devil Rays
noticed a change in Hamilton and reacted by sending him to the Betty Ford
Center for drug rehabilitation.

During Spring training of the 2003 season, Hamilton failed his first drug
test. At the start of the season, Hamilton showed up late several times during
spring training and was reassigned to the team's minor league camp. He left
the team and resurfaced several times, but eventually took the rest of the
season off for personal reasons. Hamilton was hoping to return to spring
training with the Devil Rays in 2004, but he was suspended 30 days and fined
for violating the drug policy put in place by MLB. A "failed" test is one in
which there is a positive result for a drug more severe than marijuana.[15] A
month later, MLB suspended him for the entire season after he failed two more
tests.[16][17]

Hamilton was out of baseball for almost three years. He made several attempts
at rehabilitation, and started off the 2005 season with hopes of being a star
major league outfielder. However, he was arrested before the season for
smashing the windshield of a friend's truck. The Rays placed him on the
restricted list, moving him off the 40-man roster. After another relapse, MLB
suspended him for the entire 2006 season.[17]

During the days of his most prolific abuse, Hamilton met a businessman named
Michael Chadwick who made an attempt to steer him in the right direction. It
was through this relationship that he ended up meeting his wife, Katie, who
was Chadwick's daughter.[9][18] His return to baseball was helped along by
former minor league outfielder and manager Roy Silver, who owned a baseball
academy in Florida. After hearing about Hamilton's desire to return to
baseball, Silver offered the use of his facility if Hamilton agreed to work
there. Hamilton first started working at Silver's Academy in January 2006. His
duties included cleaning the bathrooms and raking the infield. He spent his
nights sleeping on an air mattress in one of the facility's offices. After
several months there, Hamilton attempted to play with an independent minor
league team, but MLB stepped in and disallowed it.

Hamilton was allowed to work out with the Devil Rays minor league players
starting on June 2, 2006. By the end of the month, he was allowed to
participate in minor league games.[11][16] In order for this to happen, the
Rays had to run Hamilton through waivers, making him available for any team
for $20,000. No team put a claim in for him. He played in 15 games with the
Hudson Valley Renegades at the end of the 2006 season, his second stint with
the minor league ball club.[13][19]

Left off the Rays' 40-man roster, Hamilton was selected third overall[2] in
the 2006 Rule 5 draft by the Chicago Cubs, who immediately traded him to the
Reds for $100,000 ($50,000 for his rights, and $50,000 to cover the cost of
the Rule 5 selection).[19][20] In their coverage of the draft, Chris Kline and
John Manuel of _Baseball America_ called Hamilton "the biggest name in the
Rule 5 in many years".[21]

Hamilton was one of the Reds' best hitters in spring training in 2007, leaving
camp with a .403 batting average. In order to retain the rights to Hamilton,
though, the Reds would have to keep him on their Major League 25-man roster
for the entire 2007 season, so they planned to use him as a fourth
outfielder.[22]

Hamilton made his long-awaited Major League debut on April 2 against the
Chicago Cubs in a pinch-hit appearance, receiving a 22-second standing
ovation. As he was waiting to bat, Cubs catcher Michael Barrett said, "You
deserve it, Josh. Take it all in, brother. I'm happy for you."[1][23] After he
lined out, Hamilton stayed in the game to play left field.[24] He made his
first start on April 10 against the Arizona Diamondbacks, batting leadoff. In
that game, he recorded his first Major League hit, a home run off Édgar
González. The next night, he hit another. Hamilton was named the National
League Rookie of the Month for April.

On May 22, the Reds placed Hamilton on the 15-day disabled list with
gastroenteritis; they activated him on June 5 after he batted .333 (8-for-24)
with four home runs and six RBIs in a six-game Minor League rehabilitation
assignment.[25] Hamilton went back on the DL on July 12 with a sprained
wrist.[26]

Hamilton ended up starting most of the season in center field after an injury
to Ryan Freel, but he was shut out in the voting for the Rookie of the Year,
which was won by Ryan Braun.[27] On December 21, 2007, the Reds traded
Hamilton to the Texas Rangers for Edinson Vólquez and Danny Herrera.[28][29]

In 2008, Hamilton locked up the Rangers starting center fielder job with a
stellar spring training.[30] His spring training performance continued into
the regular season. Hamilton, usually slotted fourth in the Texas batting
order, led all major league players in RBIs for the month of April. He was
named AL Player of the Month after hitting .330 with 32 RBIs during the month.
Hamilton then went on to win player of the month for the second straight month
in May, becoming the first AL player in baseball history to be awarded Player
of the Month for the first two months of the season.[31] Hamilton was featured
on the cover of the June 2, 2008, issue of _Sports Illustrated_ , in a story
chronicling his comeback.[1] On July 9, 2008, Hamilton hit the first walk-off
home run of his career, against Francisco Rodríguez.[32][33]

Fans selected Hamilton as one of the starting outfielders for the AL at the
2008 Major League Baseball All-Star Game at Yankee Stadium. He finished first
in voting among outfielders.[34] He was one of seven first-time starters in
the game. Along with Kosuke Fukudome, Geovany Soto, and Ryan Braun, he was one
of four who had made their MLB debut in 2007 or 2008.[35] He was selected to
participate in the 2008 Major League Baseball Home Run Derby the evening
before the game. Hamilton selected 71-year-old Clay Council to throw to him
during the Derby. Council[36] was a volunteer who threw batting practice for
him as a child in Raleigh, North Carolina.[37] In the first round of the event
Hamilton hit 28 home runs, breaking the single-round record of 24 set by Bobby
Abreu in 2005.[4][38] Hamilton ended up hitting the most total home runs in
the contest with 35, but lost in the final round to Justin Morneau, as the
scores were reset.[39] His record-setting first round included 13 straight
home runs at one point, and 7 that went further than 500 feet (150 m). His
longest home run was 518 feet.[4][39] In 2006, when Hamilton was trying to get
back into baseball, he had a dream in which he participated in a Home Run
Derby at Yankee Stadium, but he could not remember how many home runs he had
hit. After the Derby, Hamilton said: "This was like living the dream out,
because like I've said, I didn't know the ending to that dream."[40]

On August 17, he was intentionally walked with the bases loaded against the
Rays in the bottom of the ninth, with the Rays leading 7–3, to bring Marlon
Byrd to the plate. The Rays went on to win the game 7–4. Hamilton thus became
the sixth player in history, and the first American League player in 107
years, to receive an intentional walk with the bases loaded.[41] Joe Maddon
said after the game, "We didn't want Hamilton to hit a home run. He's got 28,
and Marlon Byrd's got 8." Hamilton finished seventh in the balloting for AL
MVP, behind Dustin Pedroia, Justin Morneau, Kevin Youkilis, Joe Mauer, Carlos
Quentin, and Francisco Rodríguez.[42]

In spring training, Hamilton led all players in RBIs, with 27, and total
bases, with 59, in 81 at-bats. He hit a 460 ft (140 m) home run into the right
field home run porch off Angels reliever Shane Loux in the bottom of the
eighth inning on May 15 in Arlington. Then, in the same series against the
Angels, Hamilton leaped at the wall in center field and slammed into it,
robbing Howie Kendrick of a possible home run.[43]

Hamilton spent a portion of 2009 on the disabled list, with a bruised rib cage
and an abdominal strain. After visiting doctors in Philadelphia on June 8,
2009, they found a slight abdominal tear, and he underwent a successful
surgical operation to repair it the next day. He was expected to be out 4–6
weeks.

Though injured, he was selected by fan voting to play in the 2009 All-Star
game,[44][45] where he was joined by teammates Michael Young and Nelson Cruz.
Hamilton finished batting .268 with 10 home runs and 54 RBIs in 2009. A story
that brought some controversy was when it was revealed Hamilton had gotten
drunk in an Arizona bar earlier in the year. Hamilton subsequently apologized
about the lapse.

In 2010, Hamilton was moved to left field to put young outfielder Julio Borbon
in center field. As in his prior two seasons with the Rangers, Hamilton was
again selected to start in the 2010 All-Star Game, as one of six members of
the Rangers to represent the franchise at the All-Star Game. Hamilton entered
the All-Star Break with a .346 batting average, tied in the AL with Miguel
Cabrera.

On August 27, he set a Rangers record with his 24th three-hit game of the
season.[46] On September 4, Hamilton bruised his rib cage after making a
leaping catch into the outfield wall. He was sidelined for almost a month and
returned to play with only three games left in the regular season. He hit a
home run the next day.

His talent and popularity have earned him a litany of nicknames including "The
Hammer"; "Hambino", referencing the great Babe Ruth; "The Natural";[47] and
"Hambone", his high school nickname tattooed on his arm.

Hamilton hit a league-leading .359 average in 2010, winning his first batting
title. This was the fourth-best batting average since the end of the 2004
season. He also finished fourth in Major League Baseball in OBP (.411), first
in slugging percentage (.633) and OPS (1.044), and tied for 10th in home runs
(32), despite missing 29 games due to an injury. He was also one of just 25
players to have 100 RBIs.[48] His performance in 2010 made him a front-runner
for the AL MVP Award. Hamilton won the AL Players Choice Award for Outstanding
Player in 2010.[49]

On October 22, Hamilton and the Rangers won the 2010 ALCS. It was the first
time in Rangers history they had gone to a World Series. With four home runs,
seven RBIs, and the recipient of several intentional walks in the ALCS win
against the Yankees, he won the ALCS MVP Award.[50] On November 23, 2010,
Hamilton was voted the AL MVP.[51]

Hamilton avoided arbitration by signing for 2 years and $24 million on
February 10, 2011, with the Texas Rangers. On April 12, in Detroit, he
suffered a fracture to his right humerus on a play at home plate. On May 18,
he began a rehab assignment at the Double-A Frisco RoughRiders. He returned to
the Rangers' lineup on May 23, and went 2–4 against Chicago White Sox pitcher
John Danks, hitting his first home run of the season on the second pitch he
saw during his first at-bat.[52] He was an All-Star in 2011.[53]

On July 8, during a home game at Rangers Ballpark, a 39-year-old firefighter
died while catching a foul ball tossed into the stands by Hamilton. The fan,
Shannon Stone, leaned over the rail to catch the ball and fell 20 feet behind
the scoreboard. He was transported to a hospital, but died on the way. After
learning the news after the game, Hamilton was said to be distraught. It was
the third incident in which a fan fell out of the stands at Rangers
Ballpark.[54] On September 30, the son of the fallen firefighter and his
mother returned to Rangers Ballpark for the first time after the incident. The
son, eight-year-old Cooper Stone, threw out the ceremonial first pitch to
Hamilton to start the American League Division Series. Hamilton proceeded to
exchange multiple hugs with the family.

In 2011, Hamilton batted .298 with 25 home runs.[53] He was third in the
American League in sacrifice flies (10), sixth in intentional walks (13), and
eighth in slugging percentage (.536).[53]

Hamilton hit .395 with nine home runs and 25 RBI during the month of April and
was named the league's AL Player of the Month.[55] His home run total for the
month tied a franchise record for April with four other Rangers. Hamilton was
considered to be in a breakout season, batting for the Triple Crown and
MVP.[56]

On May 8, in a 10–3 win over the Baltimore Orioles at Camden Yards, Hamilton
registered multiple career-highs; he had five hits in five at-bats, hitting
four two-run home runs and a double for a total of eight runs batted in.
Incidentally, the only runner on base each time was Elvis Andrus. In doing
this, he not only became just the 16th player in MLB history to hit four home
runs in one game and the first to do so since Carlos Delgado in 2003, but also
now holds the American League record for most total bases in a single game
with 18. He was one base shy of tying the Major League record.[7][57]

Hamilton was selected to appear in his fifth All-Star Game after accumulating
the most fan votes by any player in the history of the All-Star Game selection
process. José Bautista held the previous record with 7,454,753 votes in 2011
until Hamilton received 11,073,744 in 2012.[5] The record stood until 2015,
when Josh Donaldson received 14,090,188 votes.[58]

Manager Ron Washington moved Hamilton to fifth in the batting order and
designated hitter before a game with the White Sox on July 29. Since June 1,
Hamilton had been hitting .190 with a slugging percentage of .374. Washington
said he moved Hamilton in hopes of taking some of the pressure off him and
also gave Hamilton the day off on July 28.[59] Hamilton responded quickly—in a
game on July 29, he recorded multiple walks for the first time in the month of
July and did not record a strikeout for the first time in seven games. On July
30 he went 3–4 with a home run, his first game recording greater than two hits
since May 11.

On December 13, 2012, Hamilton agreed in principle to a five-year contract,
worth $125 million with the Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim.[60] This deal
became official on December 15.[61]

During his first year with the Angels, Hamilton played 151 games batting .250
with 32 doubles, 21 home runs, and 79 RBI.

2014 was a challenging year for Hamilton, going .263 for only 10 HR and 44
RBIs. Worse, during the ALDS against Kansas City, Hamilton batted .000 (going
0–13). At least twice during Game 1 of the ALDS there was a runner on second
and Hamilton either struck out or grounded out.

LA Angels fans started booing him during the game. In response, Hamilton
stated to the Orange County Register that it was comical that fans were booing
him and that he "didn't ... play for the [fans]" in the stands, but for the
other players.[62]

During February 2015, Hamilton underwent shoulder surgery to repair the AC
joint. While he was recovering, it was revealed that he had a relapse into his
drug addiction, which he voluntarily reported to MLB. An outside arbitrator
ruled that his voluntary admission did not violate baseball's drug policy, and
he could not be suspended.[63] Despite the ruling, team owner Arte Moreno made
comments to the media, implying that he did not want Hamilton back on the
team. Furthermore, all Hamilton-related merchandise were removed and recalled
from all stores as well as an exchange program being set up. The Players
Association and several Angels players spoke up in Hamilton's defense.[64] The
Angels began to lay out a rehab plan for him,[65] but shortly afterwards,
reports surfaced that the Angels were looking to trade Hamilton.[66]

Hamilton was officially traded back to the Rangers on April 27, 2015, for cash
or a player to be named later.[67] After a short rehab stint to rehabilitate
his injured shoulder between the Rangers AA and AAA Minor League affiliates,
Hamilton was called up to the MLB team on May 24, 2015, and was inserted to
the starting lineup on May 25, 2015, in a Memorial Day match up in Cleveland
against the Cleveland Indians. He recorded his first hit back with the Rangers
on May 27. Hamilton had a huge series against the Boston Red Sox from May
28–31, 2015. On May 28 of the same year, Hamilton returned to Texas for the
first time in a Rangers uniform since leaving the team after the 2012 season.
He received a standing ovation from the crowd and proceeded to hit a double on
the first pitch he saw. Hamilton went 2–4 in the game, driving in the only run
for his own team in a 5–1 loss at the time. On May 29, Hamilton hit two home
runs in his first multi-homer game with the Rangers since 2012, leading the
team to a 7–4 victory. Two days later, he hit a pinch-hit two RBI double vs.
the Red Sox to win the game in walk-off fashion, 4–3. On July 30, 2015,
Hamilton recorded 4 RBI, a home run and walk off base hit in a 7–6 Rangers'
win over the New York Yankees.[68]

In the ALDS, Hamilton's first hit was a single in Game 3. This ended his
postseason hitless streak at 31 at-bats, which tied for second all time.[69]

Hamilton began the 2016 season on the 15-day disabled list. On May 25, 2016,
it was announced that Hamilton would not participate for the entire 2016
season after undergoing knee surgery for the third time in nine months.[70]
The Rangers activated Hamilton from the disabled list and released him on
August 23, as releasing Hamilton before September 1 would allow them to play
Hamilton in the major leagues before May 15, 2017, if they chose to re-sign
him.[71]

On January 16, 2017, Texas re-signed Hamilton to a minor-league deal, with
intentions of him trying out for first base.

On February 26, 2017, it was revealed that Hamilton was experiencing
discomfort in his left knee again, the same knee that underwent surgery since
June 8 of last season. Seeking an opinion with Dr. Walt Lowe, an orthopedic
surgeon in Houston, it was acknowledged that Hamilton would have to undergo
another surgery, therefore putting his career in jeopardy.[72] On February 27,
2017, he underwent surgery on the knee to repair torn cartilage that was
causing discomfort. Recovery time required up to 3 months.[73] On April 21,
the Rangers released Hamilton after revealing that he suffered a right knee
injury while in rehabilitation for the left knee.[74]

Hamilton was married to Katie (née Chadwick), the daughter of one of the men
(Michael Chadwick) who guided him in his recovery from drugs and alcohol abuse
for several years. They started dating in 2002 when he returned to Raleigh,
and married in 2004.[75][76] In early 2015, shortly after another substance-
abuse relapse, Josh Hamilton filed for divorce from Katie after 11 years of
marriage. The couple had three daughters together, along with Katie's daughter
from a previous relationship.[77]

Hamilton's struggles with drugs and alcohol are well-documented. He finally
got clean after being confronted by his grandmother, Mary Holt.[78] In May
2008, Hamilton said he had not used drugs or alcohol since October 6, 2005.[1]

When giving a brief summary of his recovery, Hamilton says simply: "It's a God
thing."[23] He does not shy away from telling his story, speaking to community
groups and fans at many functions.[79] He frequently tells stories publicly of
how he believes that Jesus brought him back from the brink and that faith is
what keeps him going. Hamilton also wrote an autobiography called _Beyond
Belief_ which explains how he quit drugs and alcohol and found a relationship
with God.[76] His ex-wife Katie sometimes accompanied him, offering her
perspective on his struggles as well.[29]

To comply with the provisions of MLB's drug policy, Hamilton provided urine
samples for drug testing at least three times per week.[80] Rangers' coach
Johnny Narron said of the frequent testing: "I think he looks forward to the
tests. He knows he's an addict. He knows he has to be accountable. He looks at
those tests as a way to reassure people around him who had faith."[76]

In late 2008 Hamilton, among other celebrities such as Brian Welch and Greg
Ellis, appeared in testimonial videos called "I Am Second", in which he shares
his story of recovering from drug use with the help of his Christian
faith.[81][82]

A portion of his return to sobriety was shown on The Learning Channel's
reality show "The Real Deal". "A Home Run for Trademark" aired March 31, 2007,
and chronicled the renovation of Shoeless Joe Jackson's house during 2006.
Richard C. Davis, the owner of Trademark Properties, hired Hamilton as the
construction foreman. Davis was negotiating the purchase of a minor league
baseball team and entertaining the idea of giving Hamilton a chance to join
the team.[83]

Hamilton's teammates—mindful of his past struggles—chose to celebrate major
events (such as the Rangers' wins over the Tampa Bay Rays in Game 5 of the
2010 American League Division Series, and again when they beat the New York
Yankees in Game 6 of the 2010 American League Championship Series) with ginger
ale instead of champagne.[84] The Rangers repeated the celebrations with
ginger ale the following postseason when they won their second consecutive
pennant and reached the 2011 World Series.

Hamilton confirmed he suffered a relapse in early 2009 after photos were
released in August 2009. Sports website Deadspin posted photos of Hamilton
shirtless in a bar in Tempe, Arizona with several women. According to reports,
witnesses saw Hamilton drinking, heard him asking where he could obtain
cocaine, and heard him reveal his plans to go to a strip club later that
evening. The photos do not show Hamilton drinking or taking any illegal
drugs.[85]

Prior to Hamilton's public admission, Johnny Narron, a Rangers special
assignment coach and Hamilton's mentor, said he doubted the validity of the
photos, telling Deadspin, "I'm sure, in the depths of his drug addiction, he
was in a lot of bars. He was in and out of bars, 'crackhouses', everything.
There are probably photographs of him in all kinds of places."[86] When
responding, Narron had not seen the photos and was told they were taken during
March 2009, not two months prior when the incident took place.[87] Although
this news did not break until August 2009, Hamilton revealed that he had
informed his wife, the Texas Rangers, and Major League Baseball the day after
the incident occurred. Hamilton called a press conference on August 8 to
discuss the photos.[88] Regarding the incident Hamilton said:

Obviously it was one of those things that reinforce that I can't have alcohol.
I got away from the one thing that kept me on the straight and narrow and that
was my relationship with the Lord. That should always come first. Hopefully
some good will come out of this. It just crossed my mind that night, 'Can I
have a drink?' Obviously I can't and this reinforces that. Since that night, I
have not had another thought like that. I know it's something I shouldn't do
because it leads to other things.

Hamilton also admitted he had very little memory of the night after getting
drunk, and did not know about the contents of the photos. Hamilton did not see
the photos after their release, but listened on the phone as his wife
described them to him. After the press conference Rangers general manager Jon
Daniels said, "My first reaction in January was one of concern. Since then
I've talked to a lot of people and they say it was significant that he came
forward immediately and was honest about it." Major League Baseball tested
Hamilton for illegal drugs two days after the incident and he passed that
test.[89]

On February 2, 2012, it was reported that Hamilton had suffered a second
relapse with alcohol. He claims to have had two or three drinks before
inviting his friend and then teammate, Ian Kinsler, to talk at the bar.[90]
Hamilton held a press conference on February 3, 2012, to apologize for his
actions.[91]

In February 2015, Hamilton relapsed, using both cocaine and alcohol.[92]

