**Joshua Michael Peck** (born November 10, 1986)[1] is an American actor,
voice actor, comedian, and YouTube personality. Peck began his career as a
child actor in the late 1990s and early 2000s, and had an early role on _The
Amanda Show_ from 2000 to 2002. Peck rose to prominence for the role of Josh
Nichols alongside Drake Bell's character in the Nickelodeon sitcom _Drake&
Josh_ from 2004 to 2007, and in its two television films in 2006 and 2008. He
then acted in films such as _Mean Creek_ (2004), _Drillbit Taylor_ (2008),
_The Wackness_ (2008), _ATM_ (2012), _Red Dawn_ (2012), _Battle of the Year_
(2013), _Danny Collins_ (2015), and _Take the 10_ (2017). Peck provided the
voice of Eddie in the _Ice Age_ franchise since _Ice Age: The Meltdown_
(2006), and voiced Casey Jones in the Nickelodeon animated series _Teenage
Mutant Ninja Turtles_ (2012–2017). He also starred with John Stamos in the Fox
comedy series _Grandfathered_ (2015–2016). In 2017, Peck started a comedic
lifestyle YouTube channel, Shua Vlogs, featuring David Dobrik and his wife
Paige O'Brien.[2]

Peck was born in New York City, New York,[1] and grew up in Hell's Kitchen,
Manhattan[3]. He attended P.S. 40 and The Professional Performing Arts School.
His parents were unmarried at the time of his birth and he has never met his
biological father. He grew up with his mother, Barbara, who is a career coach,
and his maternal grandmother. Peck is Jewish,[4] and had a Bar Mitzvah
ceremony.[5][6][7] He had asthma during his childhood, and often stayed
indoors watching old sitcoms.[8][9][10] He was inspired to become involved in
stand-up comedy when he was eight years old.

Peck subsequently appeared at TADA! Youth Theater and performed stand-up
comedy at Carolines on Broadway for the Audrey Hepburn foundation. He appeared
on _The Rosie O'Donnell Show_ at the age of 10 in 1996.[11] At the age of 13,
he was offered a role on Nickelodeon's _The Amanda Show_ and, at his mother's
suggestion, accepted the part and moved to Los Angeles to further pursue an
acting career.

Peck made his film debut in _Snow Day_ (2000), and appeared regularly on _The
Amanda Show_ until the end of its run in 2002.[12] He also starred opposite
Alex D. Linz and Zena Grey in the theatrical film, _Max Keeble's Big Move_ ,
which was released on October 5, 2001. In 2001, he guest starred in an episode
of the NBC drama _ER_ called "Thy Will Be Done". During this period, Peck
appeared in several independent films, including _Spun_ and 2004's _Mean
Creek_ , for which he received critical praise. He was cast as Josh Nichols,
opposite Drake Bell's Drake Parker, in another Nickelodeon sitcom, _Drake&
Josh_, which began airing in 2004 and gained Peck recognition among young
audiences. Peck's character, Josh Nichols, was smart, funny, and organized,
but was always being tormented along with Drake by Megan Parker (Miranda
Cosgrove), Drake's younger sister. Both characters sing in a remake of the
song "Soul Man" by Sam and Dave.[13] In 2006, Bell and Peck starred in their
own TV movie called _Drake& Josh Go Hollywood_, and in 2007, they starred in a
sequel called _Drake& Josh: Really Big Shrimp_. Josh was nominated for
Favorite Television Actor at the 2008 Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards for his
work on _Drake& Josh_.[14] Peck also made his debut as a director in the
_Drake & Josh_ episode, "Battle of Panthatar". He also directed his co-star
Drake Bell's music video for the theme song to _Drake & Josh_, "Found a Way".
He has also appeared in the series finale of _What's New, Scooby-Doo?_ , an
episode of _Codename: Kids Next Door_ called "Operation: C.A.K.E.D.-F.I.V.E.",
and the direct-to-video New Line Cinema film _Havoc_. Peck returned to the
character of Josh Nichols in 2008 for the television film _Merry Christmas,
Drake& Josh_.

In 2006, Peck appeared in the independent film _Special_ , which premiered at
the Sundance Film Festival, and voiced Eddie, one of two possum brothers, in
the animated sequel, _Ice Age: The Meltdown_ , which was released on March 31
of that year. Peck played a high school bully in 2008's _Drillbit Taylor_ ,
and starred in the films _The Wackness_ (released July 2008), _American
Primitive_ , _Safety Glass_ , and reprised his role as Eddie in _Ice Age: Dawn
of the Dinosaurs_.

In 2011, Peck had a cameo role on the hit Nickelodeon show _Victorious_ as an
audience member for a play Jade wrote. In 2012, Peck starred in the remake of
_Red Dawn_ , and once again reprised his role as Eddie, in _Ice Age:
Continental Drift_. In 2013, he began voicing Casey Jones in Nickelodeon's
_Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles_. In 2014, Peck appeared as Danny Norwood in the
pilot of _The Rebels_ , one of Amazon Studios' five adult test pilots released
on Amazon Video in early 2014.

In 2015, Peck was cast as a lead in the comedy series, _Grandfathered_. He
starred alongside John Stamos. _Grandfathered_ premiered on September 29 and
has gained generally favorable reviews from Rotten Tomatoes and
Metacritic.[15][16] Both Peck and Stamos are nominated for a 2016 People's
Choice Award in the category "Favorite Actor In A New TV Series".[17] However
it was canceled after one season.[18]

In 2016, Peck was cast as Ross in the FOX series _Pitch_. He appeared in 2
episodes as a statistics analyst. The series was cancelled after 10
episodes.[19]

Peck made his first feature on David Dobrik's Vlog on December 14, 2016, [20]
and was featured in several videos before he decided to start making videos on
his own Youtube channel. Josh Peck uploaded his first video to his Youtube
channel on July 19, 2017. [21] Josh has been uploading to Youtube regularly,
and has many brand deals such as RedBox [22] which allow him to make a decent
living off being a Youtube personality.

Peck also currently has a podcast called "Curious with Josh Peck" produced by
Ramble, [23] where he interviews celebrities such as John Stamos and Bob Saget
discussing not only current topics but their personal lives.

In the fourth season of _Drake& Josh_, Peck was noticeably thinner. He said:

I made a conscious effort to lose weight because I knew I could be happier as
well as being healthier. I started by going on a diet a year and a half ago
and I got a personal trainer, but I definitely have a healthier lifestyle now.
Also I feel that because I do so much television, I am a better role model. I
don't really understand why I should be a role model, but I know that kids do
look up to me, so it is my responsibility to motivate people and be inspiring.
I hope that I can do that for kids. It doesn't really matter what you look
like though.[5]

He is also a prominent personality on the video-sharing services Vine and
Snapchat. He now stars in vlogs made by David Dobrik on YouTube.

In June 2017, Peck married his longtime girlfriend, Paige O'Brien.[24] In
August 2018, the couple announced they were expecting their first
child.[25][26] Their son, Max, was born that December.[27]

Peck dislikes watching himself on television because he is overly critical of
himself. He cites Ben Kingsley as his favorite actor stating "Nobody is as
good as him in my opinion".[28]

