**José Ramón Nova Mesa** (Spanish: [xoˈse ˈmesa]; born May 22, 1966) is a
Dominican professional baseball pitcher who played in Major League Baseball
from 1987 through 2007. He played for the Baltimore Orioles, Cleveland
Indians, San Francisco Giants, Seattle Mariners, Philadelphia Phillies,
Pittsburgh Pirates, Colorado Rockies, and Detroit Tigers. He retired with 321
career saves.

Mesa was a two-time MLB All-Star and won the American League (AL) Rolaids
Relief Man Award in 1995, when he led the AL in saves. His nickname was "
**Joe Table** ", the literal translation of his name in the English
language.[1]

Mesa was initially signed as an amateur free agent by the Toronto Blue Jays in
1981, originally as an outfielder. He was traded to the Baltimore Orioles,
during the 1987 season for starting pitcher Mike Flanagan. Mesa began his
major-league career as a starting pitcher with the Orioles, who hoped that
Mesa's superior fastball would earn him success in the starting role. After 48
starts of below-average results during four seasons, the Orioles traded Mesa
to the Cleveland Indians in 1992. Cleveland continued to use Mesa as a starter
through the end of 1993; that year, Mesa pitched a career-high 208-2/3
innings, although his earned-run average was worse than the league average ERA
for the fifth consecutive season.

Mesa became a relief pitcher for the Cleveland Indians in 1994, and for the
first season of his career, he posted an ERA better than the league average.
In the role of closer during the 1995 season, Mesa pitched superbly; in 64
innings pitched over 62 appearances, Mesa had a 1.12 ERA, saved 46 games, and
won three. Thirty-eight of Mesa's 46 saves were recorded in consecutive
appearances in save situations; this was a major-league record at the time.
Mesa's performance in 1995 was instrumental in the Indians' 100–44 regular-
season record and their first World Series appearance since 1954. In 1997,
Mesa's 2.40 ERA, 16 saves, and four wins helped the Indians to their second
World Series appearance in three seasons; however, he failed to hold a one-run
lead in the ninth inning of Game 7 of the 1997 World Series, and Cleveland
traded him midway through the following season. Following his departure from
Cleveland, he pitched for the San Francisco Giants and Seattle Mariners, but
without much success. In 2001, he signed with the Philadelphia Phillies and
enjoyed a two-year run of success. However, in 2003 his ERA more than doubled,
and he was granted free agency at the end of the season. He spent 2004 and
2005 pitching for the Pittsburgh Pirates, and pitched for the Colorado Rockies
in 2006.

On December 10, 2006, he signed with the Detroit Tigers. He was released by
the team on June 3, 2007. In 16 appearances with the team, he was 1-1 with a
12.34 ERA. On June 8, 2007 he signed a minor league deal with the Phillies. He
appeared in 40 games for the Phillies, compiling a 1-2 record with a 5.54 ERA,
and retired following the 2007 season.

Mesa was involved in a longstanding feud with former teammate Omar Vizquel
following the publication of Vizquel's autobiography, _Omar! My Life On and
Off the Field_. In the book, Vizquel criticized Mesa's performance in Game 7
of the 1997 World Series: "The eyes of the world were focused on every move we
made. Unfortunately, Jose's own eyes were vacant. Completely empty. Nobody
home. You could almost see right through him. Not long after I looked into his
vacant eyes, he blew the save and the Marlins tied the game." Mesa reacted
furiously, pledging to hit Vizquel upon every subsequent opportunity: "Even my
little boy told me to get him. If I face him 10 more times, I'll hit him 10
times. I want to kill him."[2] By the end of the 2007 season, Mesa had hit
Vizquel on three separate occasions. Vizquel expressed regret in 2014 about
what happened due to his comments about Mesa (which he also stated were
misinterpreted) but Mesa and Vizquel have never reconciled, to the point where
Mesa said he hadn't spoken to Vizquel in over a decade and had no plans to
ever talk to him again.

Mesa was charged with one count of rape for allegedly penetrating one woman
with his finger and two counts of gross sexual imposition for allegedly
groping two women in a Lakewood, Ohio motel room on December 22, 1996. Mesa
was acquitted of all charges on April 9, 1997.[3]

Mesa's son, José Mesa Jr., is also a pitcher who played in the minor leagues
in the New York Yankees' and Baltimore Orioles' organizations and, as of 2019,
plays in the independent leagues with the Kansas City T-Bones.[4][5]

_Italics_ denotes active player

