**Karl Christian Rove** (born December 25, 1950) is an American Republican
political consultant and policy advisor.[1] He was Senior Advisor and Deputy
Chief of Staff during the George W. Bush administration until his resignation
on August 31, 2007. He has also headed the Office of Political Affairs, the
Office of Public Liaison, and the White House Office of Strategic Initiatives.
Since leaving the White House, Rove has worked as a political analyst and
contributor for Fox News, _Newsweek_ and _The Wall Street Journal_.

Prior to his White House appointments, he is credited with the 1994 and 1998
Texas gubernatorial victories of George W. Bush, as well as Bush's 2000 and
2004 successful presidential campaigns. In his 2004 victory speech Bush
referred to Rove as "the Architect". Rove has also been credited for the
successful campaigns of John Ashcroft (1994 U.S. Senate election), Bill
Clements (1986 Texas gubernatorial election), Senator John Cornyn (2002 U.S.
Senate election), Governor Rick Perry (1990 Texas Agriculture Commission
election), and Phil Gramm (1982 U.S. House and 1984 U.S. Senate elections).

Karl Rove was born in Denver, Colorado, the second of five children, and was
raised in Sparks, Nevada. His parents separated when he was 19 years old[2]
and whom Rove knew as his father, was a geologist.[3]

In 1965, his family moved to Salt Lake City, where Rove entered high school,
becoming a skilled debater.[4] Rove described his high school years as "I was
the complete nerd. I had the briefcase. I had the pocket protector. I wore
Hush Puppies when they were not cool. I was the thin, scrawny little guy. I
was definitely uncool." Encouraged by a teacher to run for class senate, Rove
won the election. As part of his campaign strategy he rode in the back of a
convertible inside the school gymnasium sitting between two attractive girls
before his election speech.[5] While at Olympus High School,[6] he was elected
student council president his junior and senior years. Rove was also a Teenage
Republican and served as Chairman of the Utah Federation of Teenage
Republicans. During this time, his father got a job in Los Angeles and visited
the family during holidays.[7]

Rove's mother suffered from depression and had contemplated suicide more than
once in her life.[7] Rove stated that although he loved his mother, she was
seriously flawed, undependable and, at times, unstable.[8][7] While he was
growing up, Rove's mother frequently acted erratic, often told lies, and had a
penchant for melodrama and fighting. Several times, she left the house for
days at a time to do her own things.[8] Rove's mother never informed him that
he was adopted.[8]

In December 1969, after a heated fight with his wife, the man Rove had known
as his father left the family and divorced Rove's mother soon
afterwards.[9][10] Rove's mother moved back to Nevada, and his siblings
briefly lived with relatives after the divorce.[7] Rove learned from his aunt
and uncle that the man who had raised him was not his biological father; both
he and his older brother Eric were the children of another man. Rove has
expressed great love and admiration for his adoptive father and for "how
selfless" his love had been.[11] Rove's father and mother expressed deep
regret over the failure of the marriage and briefly tried dating each other
after the divorce, but they refused to explain the breakup of the marriage,
only stating that they still "loved each other dearly."[7] Rove was unable to
convince his parents to get back together, as they were adamant about the
divorce, a situation which Rove still does not understand.[7] Rove's
relationship with his adoptive father was briefly strained for a few months
following the divorce, but they maintained a very close relationship for the
rest of his life.[12]

Rove had only infrequent contact with his mother in the 1970s. She frequently
withheld child support checks and spent them for herself. She and her second
husband lost most of their money due to poor financial decisions on her part
and his gambling and overspending.[8] On September 11, 1981, Rove's mother
committed suicide in Reno, Nevada, shortly after she decided to divorce her
third and final husband, to whom she had been unhappily married for only three
months.[13][12]

Rove began his involvement in American politics in 1968. In a 2002 _Deseret
News_ interview, Rove explained, "I was the Olympus High chairman for (former
U.S. Sen.) Wallace F. Bennett's re-election campaign, where he was opposed by
the dynamic, young, aggressive political science professor at the University
of Utah, J.D. Williams."[14] Bennett was reelected to a third six-year term in
November 1968. Through Rove's campaign involvement, Bennett's son, Robert
"Bob" Foster Bennett—a future United States Senator from Utah—would become a
friend. Williams would later become a mentor to Rove.

In the fall of 1969, Rove entered the University of Utah, on a $1,000
scholarship,[15] as a political science major and joined the Pi Kappa Alpha
fraternity. Through the University's Hinckley Institute of Politics, he got an
internship with the Utah Republican Party. That position, and contacts from
the 1968 Bennett campaign, helped him land a job in 1970 on Ralph Tyler
Smith's unsuccessful re-election campaign for Senate from Illinois against
Democrat Adlai E. Stevenson III.

In the fall of 1970, Rove used a false identity to enter the campaign office
of Democrat Alan J. Dixon, who was running for Treasurer of Illinois. He stole
1000 sheets of paper with campaign letterhead, printed fake campaign rally
fliers promising "free beer, free food, girls and a good time for nothing",
and distributed them at rock concerts and homeless shelters, with the effect
of disrupting Dixon's rally. (Dixon eventually won the election.) Rove's role
would not become publicly known until August 1973 when Rove told the _Dallas
Morning News_. In 1999 he said, "It was a youthful prank at the age of 19 and
I regret it."[16] In his memoir, Rove wrote that when he was later nominated
to the Board for International Broadcasting by President George H.W. Bush,
Senator Dixon did not kill his nomination. In Rove's account, "Dixon displayed
more grace than I had shown and kindly excused this youthful prank."[17]

In June 1971, after the end of the semester, Rove dropped out of the
University of Utah to take a paid position as the Executive Director of the
College Republican National Committee.[18] Joe Abate, who was National
Chairman of the College Republicans at the time, became his mentor.[11] Rove
then enrolled at the University of Maryland in College Park in the Fall of
1971, but withdrew from classes during the first half of the semester.[19]

Rove traveled extensively, participating as an instructor at weekend seminars
for campus conservatives across the country. He was an active participant in
Richard Nixon's 1972 Presidential campaign. A CBS report on the organization
of the Nixon campaign from June 1972 includes an interview with a young Rove
working for the College Republican National Committee.[20]

Rove held the position of executive director of the College Republicans until
early 1973. He left the job to spend five months, without pay, campaigning
full-time for the position of National Chairman during the time he attended
George Mason University.[11] Lee Atwater, the group's Southern regional
coordinator, who was two months younger than Rove, managed Rove's campaign.
The two spent the spring of 1973 crisscrossing the country in a Ford Pinto,
lining up the support of Republican state chairs.

The College Republicans summer 1973 convention at the Lake of the Ozarks
resort in Missouri was quite contentious. Rove's opponent was Robert Edgeworth
of Michigan. The other major candidate, Terry Dolan of California, dropped
out, supporting Edgeworth. A number of states had sent two competing
delegates, because Rove and his supporters had made credential challenges at
state and regional conventions. For example, after the Midwest regional
convention, Rove forces had produced a version of the Midwestern College
Republicans constitution which differed significantly from the constitution
that the Edgeworth forces were using, in order to justify the unseating of the
Edgeworth delegates on procedural grounds,[11] including delegations, such as
Ohio and Missouri, which had been certified earlier by Rove himself. In the
end, there were two votes, conducted by two convention chairs, and two
winners—Rove and Edgeworth, each of whom delivered an acceptance speech. After
the convention, both Edgeworth and Rove appealed to Republican National
Committee Chairman George H. W. Bush, each contending that he was the new
College Republican chairman.

While resolution was pending, Dolan went (anonymously) to the _Washington
Post_ with recordings of several training seminars for young Republicans where
a co-presenter of Rove's, Bernie Robinson, cautioned against doing the same
thing he had done: rooting through opponents' garbage cans. The tape with this
story on it, as well as Rove's admonition not to copy similar tricks as Rove's
against Dixon, was secretly recorded and edited by Rich Evans, who had hoped
to receive an appointment from Rove's competitor in the CRNC chairmanship
race.[21] On August 10, 1973, in the midst of the Watergate scandal, the
_Post_ broke the story in an article titled "GOP Party Probes Official as
Teacher of Tricks".[22]

In response, then RNC Chairman George H.W. Bush, had an FBI agent question
Rove. As part of the investigation, Atwater signed an affidavit, dated August
13, 1973, stating that he had heard a "20 minute anecdote similar to the one
described in the _Washington Post_ " in July 1972, but that "it was a funny
story during a coffee break".[23] Former Nixon White House Counsel John Dean,
has been quoted as saying "based on my review of the files, it appears the
Watergate prosecutors were interested in Rove's activities in 1972, but
because they had bigger fish to fry they did not aggressively investigate
him."[24]

On September 6, 1973, three weeks after announcing his intent to investigate
the allegations against Rove, George H.W. Bush chose him to be chairman of the
College Republicans. Bush then wrote Edgeworth a letter saying that he had
concluded that Rove had fairly won the vote at the convention. Edgeworth wrote
back, asking about the basis of that conclusion. Not long after that,
Edgeworth stated "Bush sent me back the angriest letter I have ever received
in my life. I had leaked to the _Washington Post_ , and now I was out of the
Party forever."

As National Chairman, Rove introduced Bush to Atwater, who had taken Rove's
job as the College Republican's executive director, and who would become
Bush's main campaign strategist in future years. Bush hired Rove as a Special
Assistant in the Republican National Committee, a job Rove left in 1974 to
become Executive Assistant to the co-chair of the RNC, Richard D. Obenshain.

As Special Assistant, Rove performed small personal tasks for Bush. In
November 1973, he asked Rove to take a set of car keys to his son George W.
Bush, who was visiting home during a break from Harvard Business School. It
was the first time the two met. "Huge amounts of charisma, swagger, cowboy
boots, flight jacket, wonderful smile, just charisma – you know, wow", Rove
recalled years later.[22]

Rove's initial job in Texas was in 1977 as a legislative aide for Fred Agnich,
a Texas Republican state representative from Dallas.[25] Later that same year,
Rove got a job as executive director of the Fund for Limited Government, a
political action committee (PAC) in Houston headed by James A. Baker, III, a
Houston lawyer (later President George H. W. Bush's Secretary of State). The
PAC eventually became the genesis of the Bush-for-President campaign of
1979–1980.

His work for William Clements during the Texas gubernatorial election of 1978
helped Clements become the first Republican Governor of Texas in over 100
years. Clements was elected to a four-year term, succeeding Democrat Dolph
Briscoe. Rove was deputy director of the Governor William P. Clements Junior
Committee in 1979 and 1980, and deputy executive assistant to the governor of
Texas (roughly, Deputy Chief of Staff) in 1980 and 1981.[26]

In 1981, Rove founded a direct mail consulting firm, **Karl Rove & Co.**, in
Austin. The firm's first clients included Texas Governor Bill Clements and
Democratic congressman Phil Gramm, who later became a Republican congressman
and United States Senator. Rove operated his consulting business until 1999,
when he sold the firm to take a full-time position in George W. Bush's
presidential campaign.

Between 1981 and 1999, Rove worked on hundreds of races. Most were in a
supporting role, doing direct mail fundraising. A November 2004 _Atlantic
Monthly_ article estimated that he was the primary strategist for 41
statewide, congressional, and national races, and Rove's candidates won 34
races.[27]

Rove also did work during those years for non-political clients. From 1991 to
1996, Rove advised tobacco giant Philip Morris, and ultimately earned $3,000 a
month via a consulting contract. In a deposition, Rove testified that he
severed the tie in 1996 because he felt awkward "about balancing that
responsibility with his role as Bush's top political advisor" while Bush was
governor of Texas and Texas was suing the tobacco industry.[28][ _citation
needed_ ]

Rove advised the younger Bush during his unsuccessful Texas congressional
campaign in 1978.

In 1977, Rove was the first person hired by George H. W. Bush for his
unsuccessful 1980 presidential campaign, which ended with Bush as the vice-
presidential nominee.

In 1982, Bill Clements ran for reelection, but was defeated by Democrat Mark
White.

In 1982, Phil Gramm was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives as a
conservative Texas Democrat.

In 1984, Rove helped Gramm, who had become a Republican in 1983, defeat
Republican Ron Paul in the primary and Democrat Lloyd Doggett in the race for
U.S. Senate.

Rove handled direct-mail for the Reagan-Bush campaign.

In 1986, Rove helped Clements become governor a second time. In a strategy
memo Rove wrote for his client prior to the race, now among Clements' papers
in the Texas A&M University library, Rove quoted Napoleon: "The whole art of
war consists in a well-reasoned and extremely circumspect defensive, followed
by rapid and audacious attack."

In 1986, just before a crucial debate in the campaign, Rove claimed that his
office had been bugged by Democrats. The police and FBI investigated and
discovered that the bug's battery was so small that it needed to be changed
every few hours, and the investigation was dropped.[29] Critics, including
other Republican operatives, suspected Rove had bugged his own office to
garner sympathy votes in the close governor's race.[30]

In 1988, Rove helped Thomas R. Phillips become the first Republican elected as
Chief Justice of the Texas Supreme Court. Phillips had been appointed to the
position in November 1987 by Clements. Phillips was re-elected in 1990, 1996
and 2002.[ _citation needed_ ]

Phillips' election in 1988 was part of an aggressive grassroots campaign
called "Clean Slate '88", a conservative effort that was successful in getting
five of its six candidates elected. (Ordinarily there were three justices on
the ballot each year, on a nine-justice court, but, because of resignations,
there were six races for the Supreme Court on the ballot in November 1988.) By
1998, Republicans held all nine seats on the Court.

In 1989, Rove encouraged George W. Bush to run for Texas governor, brought in
experts to tutor him on policy, and introduced him to local reporters.
Eventually, Bush decided not to run, and Rove backed another Republican for
governor who lost in the primary.

In 1990, two other Rove candidates won: Rick Perry, the future governor of the
state, became agricultural commissioner, and Kay Bailey Hutchison became state
treasurer.

One notable aspect of the 1990 election was the charge that Rove had asked the
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to investigate major Democratic
officeholders in Texas. In his autobiography, Rove called the whole thing a
"myth", saying:

In 1991, United States Attorney General Dick Thornburgh resigned to run for a
Senate seat in Pennsylvania, one made vacant by John Heinz's death in a
helicopter crash. Rove's company worked for the campaign, but it ended with an
upset loss to Democrat Harris Wofford.

Rove subsequently sued Thornburgh, alleging non-payment for services rendered.
The Republican National Committee, worried that the suit would make it hard to
recruit good candidates, urged Rove to back off. When Rove refused, the RNC
hired Kenneth Starr to write an amicus brief on Thornburgh's behalf. _Karl
Rove & Co. v. Thornburgh_ was heard by U.S. Federal Judge Sam Sparks, who had
been appointed by George H.W. Bush in 1991. After a trial in Austin, Rove
prevailed.[11]

Rove was fired from the 1992 Bush presidential campaign after he planted a
negative story with columnist Robert Novak about dissatisfaction with campaign
fundraising chief Robert Mosbacher Jr..[32] Novak's column suggested a motive
when it described the firing of Mosbacher by former Senator Phil Gramm: "Also
attending the session was political consultant Karl Rove, who had been shoved
aside by Mosbacher." Novak and Rove denied that Rove leaked, but Mosbacher
maintained that "Rove is the only one with a motive to leak this. We let him
go. I still believe he did it."[33] During testimony before the CIA leak grand
jury, Rove apparently confirmed his prior involvement with Novak in the 1992
campaign leak, according to _National Journal_ reporter Murray Waas.[34]

**1993 Kay Bailey Hutchison senatorial campaign**

Rove helped Hutchison win a special Senate election in June 1993. Hutchison
defeated Democrat Bob Krueger to fill the last two years of Lloyd Bentsen's
term. Bentsen had resigned to become Secretary of the Treasury in the Clinton
administration.

**1994 Alabama Supreme Court races**

In 1994, a group called the Business Council of Alabama hired Rove to help run
a slate of Republican candidates for the state supreme court. No Republican
had been elected to that court in more than a century. The campaign by the
Republicans was unprecedented in the state, which had previously only seen
low-key contests. After the election, a court battle over absentee and other
ballots followed that lasted more than 11 months. It ended when a federal
appeals court judge ruled that disputed absentee ballots could not be counted,
and ordered the Alabama Secretary of State to certify the Republican candidate
for Chief Justice, Perry Hooper, as the winner. An appeal to the Supreme Court
by the Democratic candidate was turned down within a few days, making the
ruling final. Hooper won by 262 votes.

Another candidate, Harold See, ran against Mark Kennedy, an incumbent
Democratic justice and the son-in-law of George Wallace. The race included
charges that Kennedy was mingling campaign funds with those of a non-profit
children's foundation he was involved with. A former Rove staffer reported
that some within the See camp initiated a whisper campaign that Kennedy was a
pedophile.[27] Kennedy won by less than one percentage point.

**1994 John Ashcroft senatorial campaign**

In 1993, Karl Rove & Company was paid $300,000 in consulting fees by
Ashcroft's successful 1994 Senate campaign.[35] Ashcroft paid Rove's company
more than $700,000 over the course of three campaigns.

**1994 George W. Bush gubernatorial campaign**

In 1993, Rove began advising George W. Bush in his successful campaign to
become governor of Texas. Bush announced his candidacy in November 1993. By
January 1994, Bush had spent more than $600,000 on the race against incumbent
Democrat Ann Richards, with $340,000 of that paid to Rove's firm.

Rove has been accused of using the push poll technique to call voters to ask
such things as whether people would be "more or less likely to vote for
Governor Richards if [they] knew her staff is dominated by lesbians". Rove has
denied having been involved in circulating these rumors about Richards during
the campaign,[36] although many critics nonetheless identify this technique,
particularly as used in this instance against Richards, as a hallmark of his
career.[37][38][39]

**1996 Harold See's campaign for Associate Justice, Alabama Supreme Court**

A former campaign worker charged that, at Rove's behest, he distributed flyers
that anonymously attacked Harold See, their own client. This put the
opponent's campaign in an awkward position; public denials of responsibility
for the scurrilous flyers would be implausible. Rove's client was elected.[
_citation needed_ ]

**1998 George W. Bush gubernatorial campaign**

Rove was an adviser for Bush's 1998 reelection campaign. From July through
December 1998, Bush's reelection committee paid **Rove & Co.** nearly $2.5
million, and also paid the Rove-owned Praxis List Company $267,000 for use of
mailing lists. Rove says his work for the Bush campaign included direct mail,
voter contact, phone banks, computer services, and travel expenses. Of the
$2.5 million, Rove said, _"[a]bout 30 percent of that is postage"_. In all,
Bush (primarily through Rove's efforts) raised $17.7 million, with $3.4
million unspent as of March 1999.[40] During the course of this campaign
Rove's much-reported feud with Rick Perry began, with Perry's strategists
believing Rove gave Perry bad advice in order to help Bush get a larger share
of the Hispanic vote.[41]

**2000 Harold See campaign for Chief Justice**

For the race to succeed Perry Hooper, who was retiring as Alabama's chief
justice, Rove lined up support for See from a majority of the state's
important Republicans.[27]

In early 1999, Rove sold his 20-year-old direct-mail business, **Karl Rove &
Co.**, which provided campaign services to candidates, along with **Praxis
List Company** (in whole or part) to Ted Delisi and Todd Olsen, two young
political operatives who had worked on campaigns of some other Rove
candidates. Rove helped finance the sale of the company, which had 11
employees. Selling **Karl Rove & Co.** was a condition that George W. Bush had
insisted on before Rove took the job of chief strategist for Bush's
presidential bid.[28]

When George W. Bush was first inaugurated in January 2001, Rove accepted an
appointment as Senior Advisor. He was later given the title Deputy Chief of
Staff to the President after the successful 2004 Presidential election. In a
November 2004 speech, Bush publicly thanked Rove, calling him "the architect"
of his victory over John Kerry in the 2004 presidential election.[42]

In April 2006, Rove was reassigned from his policy development role to one
focusing on strategic and tactical planning in anticipation of the November
2006 congressional elections.[43]

On May 2, 2007, the Senate Judiciary Committee issued a subpoena to Attorney
General Gonzales compelling the Department of Justice to produce all email
from Rove regarding the Dismissal of U.S. attorneys controversy, no matter
what email account Rove may have used, with a deadline of May 15, 2007, for
compliance. The subpoena also demanded relevant email previously produced in
the Valerie Plame controversy and the investigation regarding the CIA leak
scandal (2003).[44]

On August 31, 2007, Karl Rove resigned without responding to the Senate
Judiciary Committee subpoena, saying, "I just think it's time to
leave."[45][46][47]

On May 22, 2008, Rove was subpoenaed by House Judiciary Committee Chairman
John Conyers to testify on the politicization of the Department of Justice.
But on July 10, Rove refused to obey the congressional subpoena, citing
executive privilege as his reason.[48][49]

On February 23, 2009, Rove was required by Congressional subpoena to testify
before the House Judiciary Committee concerning his knowledge of the
controversy over the dismissal of seven U.S. attorneys, and the alleged
political prosecution of former Alabama Governor Don Siegelman, but did not
appear on that date. He and former White House Counsel Harriet Miers later
agreed to testify under oath before Congress about these matters.[50]

On July 7 and July 30, 2009, Rove testified before the House Judiciary
Committee regarding questions about the dismissal of seven U.S. Attorneys
under the Bush Administration. Rove was also questioned regarding the federal
prosecution of former Alabama Governor Don Siegelman, who was convicted of
fraud. The Committee concluded that Rove had played a significant role in the
attorney firings.[ _citation needed_ ]

Shortly after leaving the White House, Rove was hired to write about the 2008
Presidential Election for _Newsweek_.[51] He was also later hired as a
contributor for the _Wall Street Journal_ and a political analyst for Fox
News. Rove was an informal advisor to 2008 Republican Presidential candidate
John McCain, and donated $2,300 to his campaign.[52] His memoir, _Courage and
Consequence_ , was published in March 2010.[31][53] One advance reviewer, Dana
Milbank of _The Washington Post_ , said of the book that Rove "revives claims
discredited long ago".[54] The controversial book inspired a grassroots rock
and roll compilation of a similar name, Courage and Consequence,[55] that was
released a week before the memoir.

On March 9, 2008, Rove appeared at the University of Iowa as a paid speaker to
a crowd of approximately 1,000. He was met with hostility and two students
were removed by police after attempting a citizen's arrest for alleged crimes
committed during his time with the Bush administration. Near the end of the
speech, a member of the audience asked, "Can we have our $40,000 back?" Rove
replied, "No, you can't."[56]

On June 24, 2008, Rove said of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama,
"Even if you never met him, you know this guy. He's the guy at the country
club with the beautiful date, holding a martini and a cigarette that stands
against the wall and makes snide comments about everyone."[57]

In July 2008, Rove, who was hired by Fox News to provide analysis for the
network's November 2008 election coverage, defended his role on the news team
to the Television Critics Association.[58]

Rove agreed to debate one-time presidential candidate and former Senator John
Edwards on September 26, 2008, at the University at Buffalo.[59] However,
Edwards dropped out and was replaced by General Wesley Clark.[60]

In September 2009, Rove was inducted into the Scandinavian-American Hall of
Fame. The induction became a major dispute as political views clashed over the
announcement. Governor John Hoeven was scheduled to introduce Rove during the
SAHF banquet but did not attend. At that time, Rove was being investigated by
Democrats in Congress for his role in the 2006 dismissal of nine U.S.
attorneys.[61]

In 2010, with former RNC chair Ed Gillespie, Rove helped found American
Crossroads, a Republican 527 organization raising money for the 2012 election
effort.[62] Rove serves as an informal adviser for this Super-PAC.[63]

In a profile which appeared in the December 15, 2011 issue of _The New
Republic_ , Rove, with his hands-on involvement with American Crossroads, was
described as one of the shrewdest navigators of the political climate after
the Supreme Court's Citizens United decision which exempted political
broadcasts funded by corporations and unions from campaign finance limits.
"Rove had no role in creating this new legal environment... but if Rove and
his allies did not invent it, they certainly were adroit at exploiting
it."[64]

Following Todd Akin's comments regarding "legitimate rape" and the notion that
raped women are unlikely to become pregnant, Rove joked about murdering the
Missouri Senate candidate, saying "We should sink Todd Akin. If he's found
mysteriously murdered, don't look for my whereabouts!"[65][66] After multiple
news outlets picked up on the story, Rove apologized for the remark.[67]
Rove's Crossroads GPS organization had previously pulled its television
advertising from Missouri in the wake of the comments.[68]

On November 6, 2012, Rove protested Fox News' call of the 2012 presidential
election for Barack Obama, prompting host Megyn Kelly to ask him, "Is this
just math that you do as a Republican to make yourself feel better? Or is this
real?"[69][70][71]

In 2013 Rove and the PAC American Crossroads created the Conservative Victory
Project for the purpose of supporting electable conservative candidates.[72]
These efforts have attracted criticism, and even personal attacks, from
elements within the Tea Party movement.[73]

Rove's history, _The Triumph ofWilliam McKinley: Why the Election of 1896
Still Matters_, was published in 2015.[74]

In 2017, Rove's 501(c)(4) dark money group _One Nation_ nonprofit raised
nearly $17 million, according to IRS tax filings released in November
2018.[75]

Rove married Houston socialite Valerie Mather Wainwright, on July 10, 1976. He
moved to Texas in January 1977. His sister and father said that "the wedding
[that] was so extravagant that [we] ... still recall it with awe".[76] Rove
and Wainwright divorced in early 1980.[77]

Rove attended the University of Texas at Austin in 1977. In July 1999 he told
_The Washington Post_ that he did not have a degree because "I lack at this
point one math class, which I can take by exam, and my foreign language
requirement."[16]

In January 1986, Rove married Darby Tara Hickson,[16] a breast cancer
survivor, graphic designer, and former employee of Karl Rove & Company. Rove
and Hickson have one son, Andrew Madison Rove, who attended Trinity University
in San Antonio, Texas.[78]

In 2002, Rove built a home just outside Destin, Florida, which included a
television studio for remote news appearances.[79]

In December 2009, Rove and Hickson were granted a divorce in Texas.[80] Dana
Perino, Rove's spokesperson, said of the divorce, "The couple came to the
decision mutually and amicably, and they maintain a close relationship and a
strong friendship. There will be no further comment and the family requests
that its privacy be respected."[80]

In a 2007 interview with the New York Review of Books, atheist Christopher
Hitchens claimed that Rove was "not a believer".[81] However, in 2010, Rove
told Kamy Akhavan of ProCon.org in an email exchange that Hitchens had
misinterpreted a quote of his about feeling that the faith of other White
House staffers was stronger than his own and stating "I am a practicing
Christian who attends a Bible-centered Episcopal church in Washington and an
Anglican church in Texas."[82]

In June 2012, Rove married lobbyist Karen Johnson in Austin, Texas. The
wedding was attended by George W. Bush and Steve Wynn.[83]

Rove resides in the Georgetown section of Washington, D.C., and also keeps a
house near Austin, Texas.[84]

