**Kayleigh McEnany** (born April 18, 1988)[1][2] is an American political
commentator and writer.[3] She is a former CNN contributor.[4][5][6] In 2017,
she was appointed national Spokesperson for the Republican National
Committee.[7][8] In February 2019, she was announced as National Press
Secretary for the Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign.[9]

McEnany was educated at the Academy of the Holy Names,[10] a private Catholic
college preparatory school Tampa, Florida. She earned a Bachelor of Science in
Foreign Service (BSFS) in International Politics from Georgetown University
School of Foreign Service in Washington, D.C.[11] She also spent a year
studying at St Edmund Hall, a constituent college of the University of
Oxford,[12] in England. McEnany studied at the University of Miami School of
Law and then transferred to Harvard Law School, where she received a JD in May
2017.[12]

During high school and college, McEnany interned for several politicians,
including Tom Gallagher, Adam Putnam, and George W. Bush during the 2004
presidential election; later working in the President Bush's Office of
Communications in the Media Affairs department.[13] After graduating from
Georgetown, McEnany was a producer on former Governor of Arkansas Mike
Huckabee's eponymous TV show, as well as appearing elsewhere on Fox
News.[13][2] During law school, she frequently appeared on CNN, often called
on to defend President Donald Trump, whom she supported during the 2016
presidential election.[3][14][3][15]

On August 5, 2017, McEnany tweeted she was leaving CNN for another
opportunity.[16] The next day, she appeared as the host of _Real News Update_
, a pro-Trump news show on Donald Trump's Facebook page.[17] On August 7,
2017, the Republican National Committee announced that McEnany would be
appointed as its national spokesperson.[7][8]

McEnany's book, _The New American Revolution: The Making of a Populist
Movement_ , was released in early January 2018.[18]

In an interview with Chris Cuomo on CNN in August 2019, she repeatedly denied
that President Trump has ever lied to the American people with comments such
as, "He doesn't lie, the press lies" and "I don't believe the president has
lied."[19]

McEnany is married to professional baseball pitcher Sean Gilmartin.[20]

