**Kenton Charles "Teke" Tekulve** (born March 5, 1947), is an American former
professional baseball right-handed relief pitcher, who played 16 seasons in
Major League Baseball (MLB), primarily for the Pittsburgh Pirates. He also
played for the Philadelphia Phillies and Cincinnati Reds. Pitching with an
unusual submarine delivery, Tekulve was known as a workhorse relief pitcher
who holds several records for number of games pitched and innings pitched.

Tekulve is a 1969 graduate of Marietta College in Ohio.[1] He signed that year
as a free agent with the Pittsburgh Pirates and remained with that
organization until 1985. He made his major league debut against the Montreal
Expos on May 20, 1974.[2]

His best seasons came in 1978 and 1979, in both of which he saved 31 games and
posted ERAs of 2.33 and 2.75, respectively. He saved three games in the 1979
World Series including the winner, as his Pirates defeated the Baltimore
Orioles 4–3.[3] He was selected an All-Star in 1980.[4]

Early in the 1985 season, Tekulve was traded to the Philadelphia Phillies for
Al Holland and a minor leaguer, Frankie Griffin. He continued to be an
effective reliever into his 40s. Only in his first season (1974) and his last
season (1989) did he post an ERA above 4. While with the Phillies, he led the
NL in games pitched for the fourth time, with 90 in 1987 at the age of 40.[5]

Tekulve signed with the Cincinnati Reds before the 1989 season and pitched in
37 games before retiring in July.[6][7]

Tekulve led the major leagues in games pitched four times, appearing in 90 or
more games three times. He and Mike Marshall are the only pitchers in baseball
history to appear in 90 or more games more than once (each did it three
times). Tekulve is also the oldest pitcher ever to appear in 90 games, when he
did so in 1987 at age 40. Tekulve's three saves in the 1979 World Series tied
the single-Series mark set by Roy Face in the 1960 World Series; it was broken
by John Wetteland in 1996. He holds the National League record for career
innings pitched in relief (1,436⅔), and formerly held the major league record
for career relief appearances; his 1,050 career games, all in relief, ranked
second in major league history to Hoyt Wilhelm's 1,070 when he retired.
Tekulve owns the career records for most appearances and innings pitched
without making a single start. In 1986 he broke Roy Face's NL record of 846
career games pitched; he held the record until John Franco passed him in 2004.
In August of 1987, he pitched on nine consecutive days, a record for
pitchers.[8]

Tekulve also holds the record for most career losses without having given up
any earned runs, with 12, as well as the record for most intentional walks
issued, with 179.[9]

Tekulve appeared in a 1983 episode of _Mister Rogers' Neighborhood_ to explain
how people play baseball.[10]

Tekulve was a member of the Philadelphia Phillies television broadcast team
from 1991 to 1997.[11]

After several years involvement with the Washington Wild Things of the
independent Frontier League, Tekulve took a job as the Pittsburgh Pirates'
advance scout in 2006.[12]

Tekulve recently worked for AT&T SportsNet Pittsburgh (formerly FSN Pittsburgh
and later Root Sports Pittsburgh) and appeared as an analyst after each
Pittsburgh Pirates game from 2008 to 2017. However, in the early to mid part
of the 2014 Pirates season, he took a hiatus for personal reasons. Filling in
for him in his absence, former Pirates, Expos, and Blue Jays player and former
Oakland Athletics manager Ken Macha.[13]

Tekulve underwent successful heart transplantation surgery on September 5,
2014, after spending eight months on the transplant list. The surgery was
performed at Allegheny General Hospital.[14]

Tekulve threw out the ceremonial first pitch at the National League Wild Card
Game between the Pittsburgh Pirates and the San Francisco Giants on October 1,
2014.[15]

Tekulve announced his retirement from broadcasting on September 5, 2017, after
the Pirates' 4-3 win over the visiting Chicago Cubs.[16]

