**KFC** , also known as **Kentucky Fried Chicken** ,[6] is an American fast
food restaurant chain headquartered in Louisville, Kentucky, that specializes
in fried chicken. It is the world's second-largest restaurant chain (as
measured by sales) after McDonald's, with 22,621 locations globally in 136
countries as of December 2018[update].[7] The chain is a subsidiary of Yum!
Brands, a restaurant company that also owns the Pizza Hut, Taco Bell, and
WingStreet chains.[8]

KFC was founded by Colonel Harland Sanders, an entrepreneur who began selling
fried chicken from his roadside restaurant in Corbin, Kentucky, during the
Great Depression. Sanders identified the potential of the restaurant
franchising concept, and the first "Kentucky Fried Chicken" franchise opened
in Utah in 1952. KFC popularized chicken in the fast food industry,
diversifying the market by challenging the established dominance of the
hamburger. By branding himself as "Colonel Sanders", Harland became a
prominent figure of American cultural history, and his image remains widely
used in KFC advertising to this day. However, the company's rapid expansion
overwhelmed the aging Sanders, and he sold it to a group of investors led by
John Y. Brown Jr. and Jack C. Massey in 1964.

KFC was one of the first American fast food chains to expand internationally,
opening outlets in Canada, the United Kingdom, Mexico, and Jamaica by the
mid-1960s. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, it experienced mixed fortunes
domestically, as it went through a series of changes in corporate ownership
with little or no experience in the restaurant business. In the early 1970s,
KFC was sold to the spirits distributor Heublein, which was taken over by the
R.J. Reynolds food and tobacco conglomerate; that company sold the chain to
PepsiCo. The chain continued to expand overseas, however, and in 1987, it
became the first Western restaurant chain to open in China. It has since
expanded rapidly in China, which is now the company's single largest market.
PepsiCo spun off its restaurants division as Tricon Global Restaurants, which
later changed its name to Yum! Brands.

KFC's original product is pressure-fried chicken pieces, seasoned with
Sanders' recipe of 11 herbs and spices. The constituents of the recipe
represent a notable trade secret. Larger portions of fried chicken are served
in a cardboard "bucket", which has become a well-known feature of the chain
since it was first introduced by franchisee Pete Harman in 1957. Since the
early 1990s, KFC has expanded its menu to offer other chicken products such as
chicken fillet sandwiches and wraps, as well as salads and side dishes such as
French fries and coleslaw, desserts, and soft drinks; the latter often
supplied by PepsiCo. KFC is known for its slogans "It's Finger Lickin' Good!",
"Nobody does chicken like KFC", and "So good".

Harland Sanders was born in 1890 and raised on a farm outside Henryville,
Indiana (near Louisville, Kentucky).[9] When Sanders was five years old, his
father died, forcing his mother to work at a canning plant.[10] This left
Sanders, as the eldest son, to care for his two younger siblings.[10] After he
reached seven years of age, his mother taught him how to cook.[9] After
leaving the family home at the age of 13, Sanders passed through several
professions, with mixed success.[11] In 1930, he took over a Shell filling
station on US Route 25 just outside North Corbin, Kentucky, a small town on
the edge of the Appalachian Mountains.[12] It was here that he first served to
travelers the recipes that he had learned as a child: fried chicken and other
dishes such as steaks and country ham.[12] After four years of serving from
his own dining room table, Sanders purchased the larger filling station on the
other side of the road and expanded to six tables.[13] By 1936, this had
proven successful enough for Sanders to be given the honorary title of
Kentucky colonel by Governor Ruby Laffoon.[14] In 1937 he expanded his
restaurant to 142 seats, and added a motel he purchased across the street,
naming it Sanders Court & Café.[15]

Sanders was unhappy with the 35 minutes it took to prepare his chicken in an
iron frying pan, but he refused to deep fry the chicken, which he believed
lowered the quality of the product.[16] If he pre-cooked the chicken in
advance of orders, there was sometimes wastage at day's end.[9] In 1939, the
first commercial pressure cookers were released onto the market, mostly
designed for steaming vegetables.[17] Sanders bought one, and modified it into
a pressure fryer, which he then used to fry chicken.[18] The new method
reduced production time to be comparable with deep frying, while, in the
opinion of Sanders, retaining the quality of pan-fried chicken.[16]

In July 1940, Sanders finalised what came to be known as his "Original Recipe"
of 11 herbs and spices.[19] Although he never publicly revealed the recipe, he
admitted to the use of salt and pepper, and claimed that the ingredients
"stand on everybody's shelf".[20] After being recommissioned as a Kentucky
colonel in 1950 by Governor Lawrence Wetherby, Sanders began to dress the
part, growing a goatee and wearing a black frock coat (later switched to a
white suit), a string tie, and referring to himself as "Colonel".[20] His
associates went along with the title change, "jokingly at first and then in
earnest", according to biographer Josh Ozersky.[21]

The Sanders Court & Café generally served travelers, so when the route planned
in 1955 for Interstate 75 bypassed Corbin, Sanders sold his properties and
traveled the US to franchise his chicken recipe to restaurant owners.[22]
Independent restaurants would pay four (later five) cents on each chicken as a
franchise fee, in exchange for Sanders' "secret blend of herbs and spices" and
the right to feature his recipe on their menus and use his name and likeness
for promotional purposes.[23] In 1952 he had already successfully franchised
his recipe to his friend Pete Harman of South Salt Lake, Utah, the operator of
one of the city's largest restaurants.[24]

Don Anderson, a sign painter hired by Harman, coined the name "Kentucky Fried
Chicken".[25] For Harman, the addition of KFC was a way of differentiating his
restaurant from competitors; a product from Kentucky was exotic, and evoked
imagery of Southern hospitality.[25] Harman trademarked the phrase "It's
finger lickin' good", which eventually became the company-wide slogan.[23] He
also introduced the "bucket meal" in 1957 (14 pieces of chicken, five bread
rolls and a pint of gravy in a cardboard bucket).[26] Serving their signature
meal in a paper bucket was to become an iconic feature of the company.[26]

By 1963 there were 600 KFC restaurants, making the company the largest fast
food operation in the United States.[22] KFC popularized chicken in the fast
food industry, diversifying the market by challenging the established
dominance of the hamburger.[27]

In 1964, Sanders sold the company to a group of investors led by John Y. Brown
Jr. and Jack C. Massey for US$2 million (around US$15 million in 2013).[14]
The contract included a lifetime salary for Sanders and the agreement that he
would be the company's quality controller and trademark.[28] The chain had
reached 3,000 outlets in 48 different countries by 1970.[29] In July 1971,
Brown sold the company to the Connecticut-based Heublein, a packaged food and
drinks corporation, for US$285 million (around US$1.6 billion in 2013).[30]
Sanders died in 1980, his promotional work making him a prominent figure in
American cultural history.[27] By the time of his death, there were an
estimated 6,000 KFC outlets in 48 different countries worldwide, with $2
billion of sales annually.[31]

In 1982, Heublein was acquired by R. J. Reynolds, the tobacco giant.[26] In
July 1986, Reynolds sold KFC to PepsiCo for $850 million (around US$1.8
billion in 2013).[32] PepsiCo made the chain a part of its restaurants
division alongside Pizza Hut and Taco Bell.[33] The Chinese market was entered
in November 1987, with an outlet in Beijing.[26]

In 1991, the KFC name was officially adopted, although it was already widely
known by that initialism.[34] Kyle Craig, president of KFC US, admitted the
change was an attempt to distance the chain from the unhealthy connotations of
"fried".[35] The early 1990s saw a number of successful major products
launched throughout the chain, including spicy "Hot Wings" (launched in 1990),
popcorn chicken (1992), and internationally, the "Zinger", a spicy chicken
fillet sandwich (1993).[36] By 1994, KFC had 5,149 outlets in the US, and
9,407 overall, with over 100,000 employees.[37] In August 1997, PepsiCo spun
off its restaurants division as a public company valued at US$4.5 billion
(around US$6.5 billion in 2013).[38] The new company was named Tricon Global
Restaurants, and at the time had 30,000 outlets and annual sales of US$10
billion (around US$14 billion in 2013), making it second in the world only to
McDonald's.[39] Tricon was renamed Yum! Brands in May 2002.[40]

By 2015, the company was struggling, having lost business to other retailers
and being surpassed by Chick-fil-A as the leading chicken retailer in the U.S.
three years previously. To combat this, the company launched a new initiative
with a plan to revamp its packaging, decor and uniforms, as well as expanding
its menu. Additionally, beginning in May 2015, a new series of advertisements
was launched featuring Darrell Hammond as Colonel Sanders.[41] Subsequently,
in a planned rotation of actors, Norm Macdonald, Jim Gaffigan, George Hamilton
and Rob Riggle portrayed Sanders in similar ads through the fall of 2016. In
January 2018, Country Music icon Reba McEntire was chosen to be KFC's first
female Colonel Sanders.[42][43][44][45][46][47]

KFC is a subsidiary of Yum! Brands, one of the largest restaurant companies in
the world. KFC had sales of $23 billion in 2013.[5] KFC has its headquarters
at 1441 Gardiner Lane, Louisville, Kentucky, in a three-story colonial style
building known colloquially as the "White House" due to its resemblance to the
US president's home.[48][49] The headquarters contain executive offices and
the company's research and development facilities.[50] KFC is incorporated at
1209 North Orange St, Wilmington, Delaware.[51]

By December 2013, there were 18,875 KFC outlets in 118 countries and
territories around the world.[2] There are 4,563 outlets in China, 4,491 in
the United States, and 9,821 across the rest of the world.[2] Outlets are
owned by franchisees or directly by the company.[52] Eleven percent of outlets
are company owned, with the rest operated by franchise holders.[53] Although
capital intensive, company ownership allows for faster expansion of the
chain.[54]

Most restaurants are furnished with images of the company founder, Colonel
Harland Sanders.[50] As well as dine-in and take-out, many stand-alone KFC
outlets offer a drive-through option.[55] KFC offers a limited delivery
service in a small number of markets.[55] Units include express concessions
and kiosks which feature a limited menu and operated in non-traditional
locations such as filling stations, convenience stores, stadia, theme parks
and colleges, where a full scale outlet would not be practical.[55] Average
annual sales per unit was $1.2 million in 2013.[56] Worldwide, the daily
average number of food orders at an outlet is 250, with most occurring within
a two-hour peak-period.[57]

As a Director and CEO of Yum!, Greg Creed[3] ultimately has foremost
responsibility for KFC operations. Sam Su is chairman and CEO of Yum!'s
Chinese operations, and Tony Lowings is the president and CEO of KFC,
replacing Roger Eaton who retired in 2018.[58] David Gibbs is president, CFO
and COO of Yum! Brands, Inc.[3] On March 7, 2019 KFC announced a new executive
position "Chief Communications Officer" and Staci Rawls will fill that
position.[59]

The company hopes to expand its African operations, where it is already the
regional leader among US fast food chains.[60][61] The company is slowly
expanding across the African continent, opening 70 outlets, but progress has
been hampered by sourcing issues, such as a lack of quality suppliers.[54]

KFC continues to grow in Asia.

In Sri Lanka, KFC was launched in 1995 at Majestic City. There were 25 KFC
restaurants in Sri Lanka as of December 2014.[62]

In Singapore, the first KFC franchise was opened in 1977 along Somerset Road.
In 1993, KFC Singapore was the first KFC in Asia to develop and launch the
Zinger. KFC restaurants in Singapore are currently owned and operated by KFC
(Malaysia) Holdings Bhd.[63]

In Bangladesh, the first KFC outlet was opened at Gulshan in 2006. As of June
2016, the country is home to 19 KFC outlets.[64][65]

In Cambodia, KFC first opened on Monivong Boulevard in Phnom Penh in 2008.[66]

In Myanmar, the first KFC outlet was officially opened on Bogyoke Aung San
Road in Yangon in 2015.[67][68]

In Pakistan, KFC has a presence in eighteen major cities of Pakistan (Karachi,
Lahore, Islamabad, Rawalpindi, Gujranwala, Sukkur, Muree etc.) with more than
65 outlets nationwide. Its first outlet was in Gulshan-e-Iqbal, Karachi. KFC
Pakistan menu consists of sandwiches, fried chicken, nuggets, fries, rice
dishes and drinks.[69]

In Taiwan, KFC entered the market in 1984 and opened its first store in 1985
in Taipei City. The 100th store in Taiwan opened in 1999. It was the second
largest fast food chain restaurant in Taiwan until Mos Burger exceeded the
number of branches of KFC in 2008. Now KFC is the third largest fast food
chain restaurant with 137 stores as of 2017.[70]

KFC is the largest restaurant chain in China, with 5,003 outlets as of
2015.[71] They are operated by the Yum! China division. KFC became the first
Western fast food company in China after its first outlet opened in Qianmen,
Beijing, in November 1987.[72]

Local food items include rice congee and tree fungus salad, with an average of
50 different menu items per store.[72][73]

In December 2012, the chain faced allegations that some of its suppliers
injected antiviral drugs and growth hormones into poultry in ways that
violated food safety regulations.[74] This resulted in the chain severing its
relationship with 100 suppliers, and agreeing to "actively co-operate" with a
government investigation into its use of antibiotics.[72] KFC China sales in
January 2013 were down 41 percent against the previous year.[75] To counter
sluggish sales, the menu was revamped in 2014.[76]

In July 2014, Chinese authorities closed down the Shanghai operations of the
OSI Group, amidst allegations that it had supplied KFC with expired meat.[77]
Yum! immediately terminated its contract with the supplier, and stated that
the revelation had led to a "significant [and] negative" decline in sales.[78]

KFC opens its first outlet in Tibet in March 2016.[79]

There are 350 KFC outlets in India.[71] The company has adapted the standard
KFC offerings to Indian tastes[80] and the menu options in India include the
Hot & Crispy Chicken and Fiery Grilled bucket options, Chicken Zinger,
Krushers, Rice Bowlz and the more recently launched 5-in-1 Meal Box.[81] The
business was refranchised in October 2015 after Yum concluded a year-and-a-
half-long exercise to reorganize its business under larger, well-capitalized
franchisees. In this regard, about a third of its outlets, operated by several
of its franchisees, have been sold to a newly formed entity—Sapphire Foods
India Pvt. Ltd. The new entity is owned by a consortium of four private equity
funds, led by Samara Capital. The other investors are CX Partners, Goldman
Sachs Group Inc. and a fourth fund, said a top executive at the local arm of
the American food company.[82]

The first Indian KFC was a two-storey outlet on the fashionable Brigade Road
in Bangalore in June 1995.[83] According to journalist Michael White, the
company could not have chosen a "more difficult venue for its maiden entrée
into the country".[84] Bangalore housed the headquarters of the Karnataka
Rajya Raitha Sangha, one of the most influential, vocal and anti-foreign
investment farmers' associations in the country.[84] The first outlet suffered
protests from anti-globalisation and environmental campaigners, as well as
local farmers, who objected to the chain bypassing local producers.[85] Many[
_quantify_ ] Indians were concerned about the onslaught of consumerism, the
loss of national self-sufficiency, and the disruption of indigenous
traditions.[86] The protests came to a head in August 1995, when the Bangalore
outlet was repeatedly ransacked.[83] The KFC outlet in Bangalore demanded, and
received, a police van permanently parked outside for a year.[85] The outlet
was closed on September 13, 1995 by local authorities, who claimed the company
used illegally high amounts of monosodium glutamate (MSG) in its food.[87] The
outlet re-opened a few hours later as the result of an appeal by KFC to the
Karnataka High Court. The company stated the recipe was no different than that
used in any other KFC store.[88] Rural activist M. D. Nanjundaswamy claimed
KFC would adversely affect the health of the impoverished, by diverting grain
from poor people to make the more profitable animal feed.[89] Environmentalist
Maneka Gandhi joined the anti-KFC movement.[89] A second outlet opened in
Delhi, but was closed by the authorities throughout November, purportedly for
health reasons, but more likely to avoid a repetition of the Bangalore
incident.[90] The Delhi outlet soon closed permanently.[91]

KFC began to expand outside of Bangalore in 2004,[92] with a localized menu
that was the most extensive meat-free menu across the chain's worldwide
operations. It introduced a vegetarian menu that included rice meals, wraps
and side dishes and, like McDonald's, served eggless mayonnaise and sauces.
Unnat Varma, marketing director of KFC India, states "The vegetarian offerings
have made the brand more relevant to a larger section of consumers and that is
necessary for KFC's growth." KFC also began using Indian spices and cooking
techniques to localize its chicken dishes. By 2008–09, KFC operated 34 outlets
in India.[93] In 2014, KFC launched the "So Veg, So Good" menu as part of an
India-specific promotional strategy focused on enhancing their vegetarian
range. The company has been up to a lot of innovation over the past few months
with the launch of the first-ever no crust, all chicken KFC Chizza in December
2016.[94] More recently, KFC got Mumbai's dabbawalas to deliver its newly
launched 5-in-1 Meal Boxes. The city's dabbawalas, famed for their efficient
delivery of office lunches, took on the role of KFC delivery men as part of an
innovative marketing campaign. They supplied specially created 5-in-1 meal
boxes to some office-goers instead of their regular dabbas.[95] The innovation
efforts have continued with the launch of the Watt a Box, a practical new take
on the 5-in-1 Meal Box, which can also charge phones.[96]

In Indonesia, KFC is the largest Western restaurant chain, with 466 outlets as
of December 2013.[2][97] The chain has grown to hold an estimated 32 percent
market share, and menu items include spaghetti, wraps and chicken
porridge.[98] The master franchisee is PT Fastfood Indonesia.[99]

The first outlet opened in Jakarta in 1979.[99] Salim Group, Indonesia's
largest conglomerate, became a major shareholder in 1990, which provided the
company with funds for major expansion.[99] Its master franchisee, PT Fastfood
Indonesia, was publicly listed on the Indonesian Stock Exchange in 1993.[99]

KFC Japan was formed in 1970 as a joint venture between the American parent
and the Japanese Mitsubishi Corporation.[100] In December 1974, KFC Japan
began to promote fried chicken as a Christmas meal.[101] Eating KFC as a
Christmas time meal has since become a widely practiced custom in Japan.[102]
As of 2013[update], Japan is the third-largest market for KFC after China and
the United States with 1,200 outlets.[103]

In December 2007, Mitsubishi assumed majority control of KFC Japan in a JP¥
14.83 billion transaction.[104]

Being one of its largest overseas markets, the Malaysian KFC traces its origin
from January 1, 1973 from its first outlet in Jalan Tunku Abdul Rahman, Kuala
Lumpur.[105] In 2016, the brand has been crowned as the largest fast-food
chain in Malaysia and dominating 45% of the local Fast-Food Market shares with
its traditional rival, McDonald's following in second, while its sister
restaurant, Pizza Hut spotting at the third place. By 2018, the restaurant has
established a strong presence in the country, estimated to serve almost an
equal proportion with the total population of Malaysia with 25 million
customers every month by its 14,000 employees.[106][107]

Similar to other international KFC markets, the Malaysian KFC also featuring
various localised and seasonal food items in addition to the universal KFC
Menu. The Malaysian KFC customarily offers two types of fried chicken:
Original and Hot & Spicy, moreover, other types of fried chickens and food
products are also being periodically introduced to the local consumers. Among
other common year-long regional items unique to the Malaysian market includes
chicken rice, rice congee, wrap, cheesy potato wedges, gula melaka vanilla
pudding, white coffee and teh tarik. Malaysians mostly prefer dark meat cuts,
a divergent from the American KFC that observed white meat in a higher demand.
Furthermore, being a predominantly Muslim-country, all meats are slaughtered
in accord to the Halal-method under the supervision of Shariah Advisory
Council and the Department of Islamic Development Malaysia.

The KFC business design in Malaysian is generally offering a mid-range dining
option to cater the predominantly middle-class Malaysian population. The
premise is typically large in area and able to accommodate the dining culture
commonly practised among the Malaysian society, a contrast to the primarily
takeout model seen in the American market. Many of the Malaysian KFC also
operate round the clock, offering drive-through and delivery service.

As of 2018, QSR Brands (M) Holdings Bhd, the shareholder of the company in
Malaysia is also responsible on managing 810 KFC outlets across Malaysia,
Singapore, Brunei and Cambodia,[108] with more than 700 of these outlets are
being located domestically in Malaysia, hence making the country one of the
largest global market for the fast-food chain. The chain has been witnessed
rapid expansion since the opening of its 250th Malaysian outlet on May 8, 1998
located in Petronas Twin Towers, the 500th branch in Subang launched on
January 15, 2011 and the 700th restaurant in Seremban on September 18,
2018.[109][105]

Additionally, the QSR Brands is also in change on handling 380 Pizza Hut
outlets in Malaysia and 80 in Singapore, similar to some international
developments, many of these restaurants are being traditionally combined
together with a KFC premise. The company is estimated earn MYR5 billion in
revenue for KFC and Pizza Hut throughout the region in 2018, up from MYR4.56
billion (2017) and MYR4.24 billion (2016), the period recorded the company
earned a profit of MYR182.98 million and MYR113.44 million in 2017 and 2016
respectively.[110][105]

In 1995, _Projek Penyayang_ KFC was founded in an effort to provide food to
more than 150 orphanages every quarter.[111] The social service by the
restaurant was then extended by the introduction of _Tabung Penyayang_ Fund in
1997, Add Hope Malaysia in 2006 and Add Hope Wordwide in 2007 as means to aid
the local and international community.[112][113]

The chain is also one of the earliest fast-food eateries in Malaysia to employ
people with different abilities from its outlet in Jalan Imbi, Kuala Lumpur in
November 15, 1986 (has since relocated to Sentul Raya, Jalan Ipoh in
1992).[114][115] From the first fully operated KFC in the world run by speech-
and hearing-impaired staff in Kuala Lumpur, the operation has expanded to its
Malaysian operation in Tanjung Aru (Kota Kinabalu) and Saujana (Kuching)
outlets in 1996.[116] Similarly, the model has also being adopted by several
KFC eateries in Egypt, India, Pakistan, Singapore and Thailand. To date, the
establishment has employed more than 350 Malaysian individuals predominantly
of speech and hearing impairment.

KFC Malaysia is expected to have a 5% growth on sales in 2019. It has opened
23 outlets in 2018,[117][118] a further 36 outlets in 2019 and 30 eateries
later in 2020.[107][118]

As of December 2013, there were 784 KFC outlets in the United Kingdom.[2]
British turnover was around £684.5 million in 2013, according to
Technomic.[119] About 70 percent of outlets are run by franchisees, with the
remainder company owned.[120] The company employs 24,000 people.[120] Around
400 sites are drive-through outlets.[120] Average outlet turnover is between
£1 and £1.5 million.[120]

Annual sales amount to 60,000 metric tonnes of chicken, 60 percent of which is
purchased from the four largest suppliers in the UK, including Faccenda
Group[121] and 2 Sisters Food Group,[122][123] and delivered fresh to outlets
at least three times a week.[124] The remaining 40 percent is sourced from
companies in Europe, Thailand (including Charoen Pokphand Foods) and
Brazil.[125] All of the Original Recipe chicken is sourced within the UK.[125]

England had the first overseas branch of KFC which opened in Preston,
Lancashire in May 1965, and was the first American fast food restaurant chain
in the country, pre-dating the arrival of McDonald's, Burger King and Pizza
Hut by almost a decade.[126] Ray Allen, an experienced Lancashire caterer, was
the first franchisee.[127] The first London branch opened in North Finchley in
November 1968.[128] In 1971 there were 31 outlets; by 1975 the chain had grown
to 250 outlets.[129] In the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s, KFCs began to
introduce seating. KFC opened its first drive through restaurant in the UK in
1984.[130] By 1987 the company had almost 400 outlets.[131]

In May 1997, the "Tower Burger", a fried chicken fillet sandwich with the
addition of a hash brown, was first launched in the United Kingdom.[132] In
2006, the company stopped pre-salting its fries and removed trans fats from
its products.[120] In 2012 palm oil was replaced by rapeseed oil in the
fryers.[120] Between 2004 and 2014, KFC UK increased its offering of
"portable" foods: sandwiches, wraps and salads.[120] During that period, sales
rose from around £500 million to almost £1 billion.[120] In 2012, KFC UK
invested £9 million to install ovens in all of its outlets, so that it could
offer griddled chicken.[120] In 2013, KFC rolled out Lavazza coffee across all
of its UK outlets.[133] In February 2018, KFC had to temporarily close 575 of
its UK outlets, and restrict menus and opening hours in other branches, as a
result of its newly-contracted distributor, DHL, failing to deliver chicken to
the outlets.[134] As of February 2019, KFC in the UK has around 110
restaurants that are Halal approved out of more than 900 units.[135]

KFC is planning on opening up to 50 franchise restaurants in 2019.[136]

The first KFC in the Middle East opened in 1973 in Kuwait. Today there are
over 700 outlets, certified halal, including the United Arab Emirates, Egypt,
Qatar, Bahrain, Oman, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Iraqi Kurdistan, and Saudi
Arabia.[137] KFC Israel existed from 1993 to 2013 and featured kosher
restaurants.[138] In 2012 KFC opened in Ramallah in the Palestinian
Authority[8] and later expanded to Hebron,[9] Bethlehem,[10] Jenin,[11] and
three separate outlets in Ramallah: the Ersal Branch (Bacri), Plaza Mall
Branch and Masyoun Branch.[139] In 2013 the New York Times reported that KFC
was being smuggled into Gaza through tunnels.[140][141]

The first KFC opened in 1955; 64 years ago (1955) in Saskatoon, Canada.[142]
In 1957, Colonel Harland Sanders gave an interview to CBC Radio[143] [a]
detailing his experience with Canadian food that led to the opening of one of
his restaurants in Canada.

In Quebec, KFC is known as "PFK", due to Canada's Official Languages Act.[144]

KFC sales in the United States in 2013 were estimated at $4.22 billion by
Technomic.[145]

The basic model for KFC in the United States, not necessarily duplicated
elsewhere, is a focus on low prices, a limited menu (29 items on average) and
an emphasis on takeout.[53] A "very strong percentage" of sales come from
African American customers.[146] Many KFC locations are co-located with either
Taco Bell or Pizza Hut, or other Yum! restaurants.[55] When Yum! owned Long
John Silver's and A&W Restaurants, these brands were often co-branded with KFC
as well.[147] Often these locations behave like a single restaurant, offering
one menu with food items from both restaurant brands.[148] In 2003, there were
354 KFC-Taco Bell combines, offering the full KFC menu and Taco Bell items,
and 13 units offering the full KFC menu and a limited number of Pizza Hut
items.[55] The concept originated in 1991, when a KFC-Taco Bell combination
opened in Virginia.[26] Some locations were also opened as combinations of
KFC, Taco Bell and Pizza Hut, but this failed to catch on, and Yum! CEO David
Novak blamed a lack of franchisee commitment for its lack of success.[149]

Initially, Sanders and KFC used hydrogenated vegetable oil for frying, but in
the 1980s the company began to switch to cheaper oils such as palm or
soybean.[150][151] In the 2000s it became apparent that these oils contain
relatively high levels of trans fat, which increases the risk of heart
disease. By April 2007, the chain had switched to trans fat-free soybean oil
in all of its US outlets.[152]

In 2008, Novak credited low US sales as being the result of a lack of new
ideas and menu items.[153] The Spring 2009 launch of Kentucky Grilled Chicken
only resulted in a temporary halt to the sales decline.[154] In 2010 KFC
announced a turnaround plan that included improving restaurant operations,
introducing value items and providing healthier menu options.[154] In the same
year, _Advertising Age_ noted that KFC was losing market share to its smaller
chicken restaurant rival, Chick-fil-A.[155] In 2011 Bloomberg News referred to
KFC US as "an also-ran to McDonald's Corp".[156] In 2012, _Forbes_ magazine
described how many of the KFC outlets were "aged and uninviting", and that the
chain "hasn't introduced an exciting new food item in ages".[157]

KFC was described in 2012 by _Bloomberg Businessweek_ as a "muscular player"
in developing regions, specifically Africa, China and India, while noting its
falling market share in the US to rivals such as Chick-fil-A and Popeyes.[158]
Some analysts speculated that KFC would begin spinning off its ailing US
operations.[158] That year, the company began divesting control of company-
owned US restaurants to franchised operations, with the intention of reducing
overall company ownership from 35 percent to 5 percent.[158]

KFC was the first fast food restaurant opened in Mexico, in 1963 in
Monterrey.[159] By 2017, there were 341 outlets in the country.[160]

There are over 600 KFC outlets in Australia, and around 100 in New
Zealand.[103] KFC was the first American style fast food chain to open in both
countries.[161] In 2013, KFC reported an annual turnover of almost 2 billion
AUD for its Australia and New Zealand operations.[162]

Yum! directly operates 160 KFC outlets in Australia.[162] The largest of the
53 independent franchisees in Australia is Collins Foods, which operates 169
stores.[162][163] KFC's major poultry suppliers in Australia are Inghams,
Steggles and Turi Foods.[162]

The first Australian KFC was opened in 1968 in Guildford, a suburb of
Sydney.[164] The franchise was owned by a Canadian entrepreneur called Bob
Lapointe.[165] Between 1970 and 1971, 75 outlets were opened.[165] This had a
major impact on Australian chicken production, which increased by 38 percent
during the period.[165] By 1995 there were 452 outlets, and the company
employed 12,000 staff.[164] That year, Australia produced 35 percent of KFC's
international earnings.[164]

The first KFC opened in New Zealand in 1971 at Royal Oak, a suburb of
Auckland.[166] By 1980 there were 37 outlets.[161] In 1989, PepsiCo acquired
the 50 percent stake in KFC New Zealand that it did not already own from the
local Goodman Fielder conglomerate.[166] In 1991 New Zealand turnover topped
100 million NZD for the first time.[166]

KFC's core product offering is pressure fried, on-the-bone chicken pieces
seasoned with Colonel Harland Sanders' "Original Recipe" of 11 herbs and
spices.[167] The product is typically available in either two or three piece
individual servings, or in a family size cardboard bucket, typically holding
between 6 and 16 chicken pieces. In territories that follow the system handed
down by Colonel Sanders, such as Canada and the UK, each chicken is divided
into nine different cuts (2 drumsticks, 2 thighs, 2 wings, 2 breast pieces and
one keel),[168][169] however the United States now uses an eight piece
cut.[170] The product is hand-breaded at individual KFC outlets with wheat
flour mixed with seasoning in a two- to four-minute process.[57][162] It is
then pressure fried for between seven and ten minutes (the timing differs
between countries) in oil at 185 degrees Celsius.[57][171][172] Following
this, the chicken is left to stand for 5 minutes in order for it to
sufficiently cool before it is placed in the warming oven.[57] It is KFC
policy to discard chicken if it has not been sold within 90 minutes, in order
to ensure freshness.[57] The frying oil varies regionally, and versions used
include sunflower, soybean, rapeseed and palm oil.[54] A KFC executive stated
that the taste of the chicken will vary between regions depending on the oil
variety used, and whether the chicken has been corn-fed or wheat-fed.[54]

As well as its core chicken on the bone offering, KFC's major products include
chicken sandwiches (including the Zinger and the Tower); wraps ("Twisters" and
"Boxmasters"); and a variety of finger foods, including crispy chicken strips
and hot wings.[173][174] Popcorn Chicken is one of the most widely available
KFC products, and consists of small pieces of fried chicken.[175] In some
locations, chicken nuggets are also sold.[176]

KFC adapts its menu internationally to suit regional tastes, and there are
over three hundred KFC menu items worldwide.[53] Some locations, such as the
UK and the US, sell grilled chicken.[177][178] In predominantly Islamic
countries, the chicken served is halal.[57] In Asia there is a preference for
spicy foods, such as the Zinger chicken sandwich.[179] Some locations in the
US sell fried chicken livers and gizzards.[180] A small number of US outlets
offer an all-you-can-eat buffet option with a limited menu.[181]

A number of territories, such as Japan, Jamaica, Trinidad, Barbados, Ecuador
and Singapore sell fried seafood products under the "Colonel's Catch"
banner.[182] In Jamaica, what was originally a seasonal offering for the Lent
period was expanded to a year-round offering from 2010.[183]

Value menu items are sold under the "Streetwise" name in locations such as
Canada.[184] Side dishes often include French fries, coleslaw, barbecue baked
beans, corn on the cob, mashed potato, bread rolls and American
biscuits.[185][186] Salads include the bean salad, the Caesar salad and the
garden salad.[187] In a number of territories, KFC sell onion rings.[188] In
Asia, rice based side dishes such as congee are often sold.[72] In the US and
Greece, potato wedges are sold instead of French fries.[189]

McCormick & Company is KFC's largest supplier of sauces, seasonings and
marinades, and is a long-term partner in new product development.[162]

Due to the company's previous relationship with PepsiCo, most territories
supply PepsiCo products, but exceptional territories include Barbados, Greece,
New Zealand, the Philippines, Romania, South Africa, and Turkey, which stock
drinks supplied by The Coca-Cola Company, and Aruba, which stocks RC Cola from
the Cott Corporation.[190][191][192][193] In Peru, the locally popular Inca
Kola is sold.[194] In a number of Eastern European locations and Portugal,
beer is offered, in addition to soft drinks.[195][196][197]

Launched in 2009, the Krusher/Krushem range of frozen beverages containing
"real bits" such as Kit Kat, Oreo and strawberry shortcake, is available in
over 2,000 outlets.[198] Egg custard tart is a popular dessert worldwide, but
other items include ice cream sundaes and tres leches cake in Peru.[199]

In 2012, the "KFC am" breakfast menu began to be rolled out internationally,
including such items as pancakes, waffles and porridge, as well as fried
chicken.[200][201]

On August 27, 2019, KFC tested meatless boneless wings and chicken nuggets in
Atlanta, Georgia.[202][203]

Sanders' Original Recipe of "11 herbs and spices" is one of the most famous
trade secrets in the catering industry.[204][205] The recipe is not patented,
because patent law requires public disclosure of an invention and provides
protection only for a strictly limited term, whereas trade secrets can remain
the intellectual property of their holders in perpetuity.[206]

A copy of the recipe, signed by Sanders, is held inside a safe inside a vault
in KFC's Louisville headquarters, along with eleven vials containing the herbs
and spices.[158][207] To maintain the secrecy of the recipe, half of it is
produced by Griffith Laboratories before it is given to McCormick, who add the
second half.[208]

In 1999, a couple who bought the house formerly occupied by Colonel Sanders
found scribbled notes purported to be the secret recipe. Initially KFC wanted
to file a lawsuit against the couple to stop an auction of the notes, but by
early 2001, it dropped the lawsuit, claiming the scribbled notes are "nowhere
close" to the original recipe.[209]

Joe Ledington of Kentucky, a nephew by marriage of Colonel Sanders, claimed to
have found a copy of the original KFC fried chicken recipe on a handwritten
piece of paper in an envelope in a scrapbook. In August 2016, _Chicago
Tribune_ staffers conducted a cooking test of this recipe and claimed after a
few attempts that, with the addition of MSG flavor-enhancer, Ac'cent, they
produced fried chicken which tasted "indistinguishable" from the chicken they
purchased at KFC.[210]

KFC initially used stove-top covered cooking pots to fry its chicken.[211] In
the 1960s, the officially recommended model was the L S Hartzog developed "KFC
20-Head Cooker", a large device that cost $16,000.[212] The Hartzog model had
no oil filtration system, meaning that filtering had to be done manually, and
the pressure fryers occasionally exploded, often causing harm to
employees.[211] In 1969, inventor and engineer Winston L. Shelton developed
the "Collectramatic" pressurized fryer to overcome the problems KFC faced in
quickly frying chicken to meet growing customer demand. The Collectramatic
used precision time and temperature controls and self-filtered the cooking oil
– all while meeting Colonel Sanders' legendary high quality standards.[211]
Fred Jeffries, then vice president of purchasing at KFC, claimed that the
invention helped fuel the company's rapid expansion and success:

There's no way it (KFC) could have grown like it did without the
Collectramatic. Stores were doing about $200,000 a year in sales on average
with the pots ... but they could never have done the $900,000 a year it became
without Win's fryer. He (Shelton) helped set the stage for that with true
engineering thinking.[211]

Although a number of franchisees bought the Collectramatic, which had the
support of Colonel Sanders from 1970 onwards, John Y. Brown had given tacit
approval to franchisees to exclusively use the older L S Hartzog fryer, saying
"Though those old pots were damn dangerous, at least we knew they worked! I
was mostly afraid these new fryers would break down in the middle of
business."[211] Brown warned franchisees that they were in violation of their
contract if they used the Collectramatic.[211] Brown held his ground on the
issue until he learned that his father, John Y. Brown Sr., who owned multiple
KFC franchises, was successfully using the Collectramatic in every franchise
he owned.[211] The issue was eventually resolved after Heublein purchased KFC,
acquired Hartzog and nullified the contract.[212] The Collectramatic has been
an approved pressure fryer for KFC from 1972 onwards.[212]

From 2013 onwards, KFC has been transitioning from using Collectramatic
cookers to pressure fryers produced by Henny Penny, which supplies KFC with
various equipment[213]. The 'Velocity' series of pressure fryers includes
increased load capacity, automatic oil filtration and increased oil longevity.

Colonel Sanders was a key component of KFC advertising until his death in
1980. Despite his death, Sanders remains a key icon of the company as an
"international symbol of hospitality".[214] Early official slogans for the
company included "North America's Hospitality Dish" (from 1956) and "We fix
Sunday dinner seven nights a week".[215][216] The "finger lickin' good" slogan
was used from 1956, and went on to become one of the best-known slogans of the
20th century.[217] The trademark expired in the US in 2006.[218] The first KFC
logo was introduced in 1952 and featured a "Kentucky Fried Chicken" typeface
and a logo of the Colonel.[219]

Advertising played a key role at KFC after it was sold by Sanders, and the
company began to advertise on US television with a budget of US$4 million in
1966.[220] In order to fund nationwide advertising campaigns, the Kentucky
Fried Chicken Advertising Co-Op was established, giving franchisees ten votes
and the company three when deciding on budgets and campaigns. In 1969, KFC
hired its first national advertising agency, Leo Burnett.[26] A notable
Burnett campaign in 1972 was the "Get a bucket of chicken, have a barrel of
fun" jingle, performed by Barry Manilow.[26] By 1976 KFC was one of the
largest advertisers in the US.[221]

Since the beginning of the 21st century, fast food has been criticized for its
animal welfare record, its links to obesity and its environmental impact.[222]
Eric Schlosser's book _Fast Food Nation_ (2002) and Morgan Spurlock's film
_Super Size Me_ (2004) reflected these concerns.[25] Since 2003, People for
the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) has protested KFC's choice of poultry
suppliers worldwide.[223] The exception is KFC Canada, which signed an
agreement pledging to only use "animal friendly" suppliers.[224] President of
KFC's US division Gregg Dedrick said PETA mischaracterized KFC as a poultry
producer rather than a purchaser of chickens.[225] In 2008, Yum! stated: "[As]
a major purchaser of food products, [Yum!] has the opportunity and
responsibility to influence the way animals supplied to us are treated. We
take that responsibility very seriously, and we are monitoring our suppliers
on an ongoing basis."[226]

In 2006, Greenpeace accused KFC Europe of sourcing the soya bean for its
chicken feed from Cargill, which had been accused of clearing large swathes of
the Amazon rainforest in order to grow the crop.[227]

In 2010, according to _The Guardian_ , "in the US where fried chicken remains
closely associated with age-old racist stereotypes about black people in the
once segregated south", KFC Australia aired a thirty second promotion on
television named "KFC's cricket survival guide" which shows a Cricket fan
surrounded by fans from the opposing team. The television announcer asks,
"Need a tip when you're stuck in an awkward situation?" the fan passes around
his "bucket of KFC", even though the commercial was intended for a group of
Australian modern artists that protested against abstract expressionism, the
commercial found its way to social media in the United States, prompting sharp
disapproval. KFC Australia made a statement to the fact the commercial was
"misinterpreted by a segment of people in the US" and it was a "light-hearted
reference to the West Indian cricket team" and "The ad was reproduced online
in the US without KFC's permission, where we are told a culturally-based
stereotype exists, leading to the incorrect assertion of racism... We
unequivocally condemn discrimination of any type and have a proud history as
one of the world's leading employers for diversity".[228]

In May 2012, Greenpeace accused KFC of sourcing paper pulp for its food
packaging from Indonesian rainforest wood.[229] Independent forensic tests
showed that some packaging contained more than 50 percent mixed tropical
hardwood fiber, sourced from Asia Pulp & Paper (APP).[230][231] APP said such
fiber can be found in recycled paper, or: "It can also come from tree residues
that are cleared, after a forest area has become degraded, logged-over or
burned, as part of a sustainable development plan. APP has strict policies and
practices in place to ensure that only residues from legal plantation
development on degraded or logged-over forest areas and sustainable wood fiber
enters the production supply chain."[230] KFC said: "From a global
perspective, 60 percent of the paper products that Yum! (our parent company)
sources are from sustainable sources. Our suppliers are working towards making
it 100 percent."[229]

In December 2012, the chain was criticized in China when it was discovered
that a number of KFC suppliers had been using growth hormones and an excessive
amount of antibiotics on its poultry in ways that violated Chinese law.[232]
In February 2013, Yum! CEO David Novak admitted that the scandal had been
"longer lasting and more impactful than we ever imagined."[232] The issue is
of major concern to Yum!, which earns almost half of its profits from China,
largely through the KFC brand. In March 2013, Yum! reported that sales had
rebounded in February, but that lower sales in December and January would
result in a decline in same-store sales of 20 percent in the first
quarter.[233]

In 2017, KFC was fined £950,000 after two workers were scalded by boiling hot
gravy. The company admitted to charges of failing in a duty of care to
employees, and was ordered by Teesside Crown Court to pay fines of £800,000
and £150,000.[234]

In February 2018, logistics mismanagement by DHL, which had been selected by
KFC UK as their new delivery partner, caused a chicken shortage in the United
Kingdom – KFC's largest market in Europe – forcing the company to temporarily
close hundreds of restaurants around the country.[235] KFC apologized by
taking out adverts in British newspapers with the company's initials scrambled
to read "FCK" on it followed by an apology, which was well received.[236]

