**Kristoffer Kristofferson** (born June 22, 1936) is an American singer-
songwriter and actor. Among his songwriting credits are the songs "Me and
Bobby McGee", "For the Good Times", "Sunday Mornin' Comin' Down", and "Help Me
Make It Through the Night", all of which were hits for other artists.
Kristofferson composed his own songs and collaborated with Nashville
songwriters such as Shel Silverstein.[1] In 1985, Kristofferson joined fellow
country artists Waylon Jennings, Willie Nelson and Johnny Cash in forming the
country music supergroup The Highwaymen, and formed a key creative force in
the Outlaw country music movement that eschewed the Nashville music machine in
favor of independent songwriting and producing. In 2004, Kristofferson was
inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame. He is also known for his
starring roles in _Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore_ , _Heaven's Gate_ ,
_Blade_ and _A Star Is Born_ , the latter of which earned him a Golden Globe
Award for Best Actor.

Kristoffer Kristofferson was born in Brownsville, Texas, to Mary Ann (n√©e
Ashbrook) and Lars Henry Kristofferson, a U.S. Army Air Corps officer (later a
U.S. Air Force major general).[2] His paternal grandparents emigrated from
Sweden, while his mother had English, Scots-Irish, German, Swiss-German, and
Dutch ancestry. Kristofferson's paternal grandfather was an officer in the
Swedish Army. When Kristofferson was a child, his father pushed him towards a
military career.[3]

At the age of 17, Kristofferson took a summer job with a dredging contractor
on Wake Island. He called it "the hardest job I ever had."[4]

Like most "military brats", Kristofferson moved around frequently as a youth,
finally settling down in San Mateo, California, where he graduated from San
Mateo High School in 1954. An aspiring writer, Kristofferson enrolled in
Pomona College that same year. Kris Kristofferson's early fiction work
included essays which won him prizes, while "The Rock" and "Gone Are the Days"
were published in _The Atlantic Monthly_. These early stories reveal the roots
of Kris' passions and concerns. The Rock is about a geographical feature that
resembled the form of a woman. while the other was about a racial incident.[5]

He experienced his first dose of fame when he appeared in _Sports
Illustrated'_s "Faces in the Crowd" for his achievements in collegiate Rugby
Union, American Football, and Track and Field. He and his classmates revived
the Claremont Colleges Rugby Club in 1958, which has remained a southern
California rugby institution. Kristofferson graduated in 1958 with a Bachelor
of Arts degree, _summa cum laude_ , in literature. He was elected to Phi Beta
Kappa his junior year. In a 2004 interview with _Pomona College Magazine_ ,
Kristofferson mentioned philosophy professor Frederick Sontag as an important
influence in his life.[6]

Kristofferson earned a Rhodes Scholarship to Oxford University, where he
studied at Merton College.[7] While at Oxford, he was awarded his Blue for
boxing,[7] played rugby for his college, and began writing songs. At Oxford,
he was also acquainted with fellow Rhodes scholar, art critic, and poet
Michael Fried. With the help of his manager, Larry Parnes, Kristofferson
recorded for Top Rank Records under the name Kris Carson. Parnes was working
to sell Kristofferson as "a Yank at Oxford" to the British public;
Kristofferson was willing to accept that promotional approach if it helped his
singing career, which he hoped would enable him to progress towards his goal
of becoming a novelist.[8] This early phase of his music career was
unsuccessful.[9]

In 1960, Kristofferson graduated with a B.Phil. degree in English
literature.[7][10][11] The following year he married his long-time girlfriend,
Frances Mavia Beer.[7]

Kristofferson, under pressure from his family, ultimately joined the U.S.
Army, was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant and attained the rank of
captain. He became a helicopter pilot after receiving flight training at Fort
Rucker, Alabama. He also completed Ranger School. During the early 1960s, he
was stationed in West Germany as a member of the 8th Infantry Division.[12]
During this time, he resumed his music career and formed a band. In 1965, when
his tour of duty ended, Kristofferson was given an assignment to teach English
literature at West Point.[13] Instead, he decided to leave the Army and pursue
songwriting. His family disowned him because of his career decision, and
sources are unclear on whether or not they reconciled.[14][15][16] They saw it
as a rejection of everything they stood for, in spite of the fact that
Kristofferson has said he is proud of his time in the military, and received
the Veteran of the Year Award at the 2003 American Veterans Awards
ceremony.[17][18]

After leaving the army in 1965, Kristofferson moved to Nashville. He worked at
a variety of odd jobs while struggling for success in music, burdened with
medical expenses resulting from his son's defective esophagus. He and his wife
soon divorced.

He got a job sweeping floors at Columbia Recording Studios in Nashville. He
met June Carter there and asked her to give Johnny Cash a tape of his. She
did, but Johnny put it in a large pile with others. He also worked as a
commercial helicopter pilot for south Louisiana firm Petroleum Helicopters
International (PHI), based in Lafayette, Louisiana. Kristofferson recalled of
his days as a pilot, "That was about the last three years before I started
performing, before people started cutting my songs. I would work a week down
here [in south Louisiana] for PHI, sitting on an oil platform and flying
helicopters. Then I'd go back to Nashville at the end of the week and spend a
week up there trying to pitch the songs, then come back down and write songs
for another week. I can remember "Help Me Make It Through the Night" I wrote
sitting on top of an oil platform. I wrote "Bobby McGee" down here, and a lot
of them [in south Louisiana]."[19]

Weeks after giving June his tapes, Kristofferson landed a helicopter in Cash's
front yard, gaining his full attention.[20] [Note: The story about
Kristofferson having a beer in one hand and some songs in the other is a
fable.] Cash decided to record "Sunday Mornin' Comin' Down" and that year
Kristofferson won Songwriter of the Year at the Country Music Awards.

In 1966, Dave Dudley released a successful Kristofferson single, "Viet Nam
Blues." In 1967, Kristofferson signed to Epic Records and released a single,
"Golden Idol/Killing Time," but the song was not successful. Within the next
few years, more Kristofferson originals hit the charts, performed by Roy
Drusky ("Jody and the Kid"); Billy Walker & the Tennessee Walkers ("From the
Bottle to the Bottom"); Ray Stevens ("Sunday Mornin' Comin' Down"); Jerry Lee
Lewis ("Once More with Feeling"); Faron Young ("Your Time's Comin'"); and
Roger Miller ("Me and Bobby McGee", "Best of all Possible Worlds", and
"Darby's Castle"). He achieved some success as a performer himself, following
Johnny Cash's introduction of him at the Newport Folk Festival.

Kristofferson signed to Monument Records as a recording artist. In addition to
running that label, Fred Foster also served as manager of Combine Music,
Kristofferson's songwriting label. His debut album for Monument in 1970 was
_Kristofferson_ , which included a few new songs, as well as many of his
previous hits. Sales were poor, although this debut album would become a
success the following year when it was re-released under the title _Me & Bobby
McGee_. Kristofferson's compositions were still in high demand. Ray Price
("For the Good Times"), Gladys Knight & The Pips ("Help Me Make It Through The
Night"), Waylon Jennings ("The Taker"), Bobby Bare ("Come Sundown"), Johnny
Cash ("Sunday Morning Coming Down"), and Sammi Smith ("Help Me Make It Through
the Night") all recorded successful versions of his songs in the early 1970s.
"For the Good Times" (Ray Price) won "Song of the Year" in 1970 from the
Academy of Country Music, while "Sunday Morning Coming Down" (Johnny Cash) won
the same award from the Academy's rival, the Country Music Association, in the
same year. This is the only time an individual received the same award from
these two organizations in the same year for different songs.

In 1971, Janis Joplin, who dated Kristofferson for some time until her death,
had a number one hit with "Me and Bobby McGee" from her posthumous album
_Pearl_. When released, it stayed on the number-one spot on the charts for
weeks. More hits followed from others: Ray Price ("I'd Rather Be Sorry"); Joe
Simon ("Help Me Make It Through the Night"); Bobby Bare ("Please Don't Tell Me
How the Story Ends"); O.C. Smith ("Help Me Make It Through the Night"); Jerry
Lee Lewis ("Me and Bobby McGee"); Patti Page ("I'd Rather Be Sorry"); and
Peggy Little ("I've Got to Have You"). The country music performer Kenny
Rogers has also recorded some of Kristofferson's compositions, including a
version of "Me and Bobby McGee" in 1969 with The First Edition for the Ruby,
Don't Take Your Love To Town album.

Kristofferson released his second album, _The Silver Tongued Devil and I_ in
1971; including "Lovin' Her Was Easier (Than Anything I'll Ever Do Again)". It
was a success and established Kristofferson's career as a recording artist in
his own right. Soon after, Kristofferson made his acting debut in _The Last
Movie_ (directed by Dennis Hopper) and appeared at the Isle of Wight Festival.
A portion of his Isle of Wight performance is featured on the three disc
compilation The First Great Rock Festivals of the Seventies. In 1971, he acted
in _Cisco Pike_ and released his third album, _Border Lord_. The album was
all-new material and sales were sluggish. He also swept the Grammy Awards that
year with numerous songs nominated, winning country song of the year for "Help
Me Make It Through the Night." Kristofferson's 1972 fourth album, _Jesus Was a
Capricorn_ , initially had slow sales, but the third single, "Why Me," was a
success and significantly increased album sales. It sold over one million
copies, and was awarded a gold disc by the RIAA on November 8, 1973.[21] In
1972, Kristofferson appeared with Rita Coolidge on British TV on BBC's "The
Old Grey Whistle Test", performing a physically intimate version of "Help Me
Make It Through The Night".

For the next several years, Kristofferson focused on acting. He appeared in
_Blume in Love (1973)_ directed by Paul Mazursky and three Sam Peckinpah
films: _Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid, Bring Me the Head of Alfredo Garcia
(1974)_ and _Convoy (1978)._ He continued acting in _Alice Doesn't Live Here
Anymore_ (1974) and in _Vigilante Force_ , a film based on the Yukio Mishima
novel _The Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea._ The romantic drama _A
Star Is Born (1976)_ with Barbra Streisand, for which he received a Golden
Globe Award for Best Actor soon followed. At the peak of his box-office power,
Kristofferson turned down William Friedkin's _Sorcerer_ (1977) and the
romantic war film _Hanover Street_. Despite his success with Streisand,
Kristofferson's solo musical career headed downward with his non-charting
ninth album, _Shake Hands with the Devil_. His next film, the two-part 1979
NBC-TV movie _Freedom Road_ , did not get good ratings.

Kristofferson was next cast in the lead role as the enigmatic Sheriff James
Averill in Michael Cimino's bleak and sprawling 1980 anti-Western _Heaven's
Gate_. Despite being a scandalous studio-bankrupting and industry-changing
failure at the time (it cost Kristofferson his Hollywood A-lister status), the
film gained critical recognition in subsequent years. In 1986, he starred in
_The Last Days of Frank and Jesse James_ with Johnny Cash and _Flashpoint_ in
1984 directed by William Tannen. In 1987, Kristofferson starred in the
7-episode TV series _Amerika_ with Robert Urich and Christine Lahti. In 1989,
he was the male lead in the film _Millennium_ with Cheryl Ladd. In 1996, he
earned a supporting role as Charlie Wade, a corrupt South Texas sheriff in
John Sayles's _Lone Star_ , a film nominated for an Oscar for Best Screenplay.
In 1997, he co-starred in the film _Fire Down Below_ with Steven Seagal.

In 1998, he took a role in the film _Blade_ , alongside Wesley Snipes, as
Blade's mentor Abraham Whistler. He reprised the role in _Blade II_ (2002) and
again in _Blade: Trinity_ (2004). In 1998 he starred in Dance with Me along
with Vanessa Williams and Chayanne. In 1999, he co-starred with Mel Gibson in
_Payback_. He was then in the 2001 Tim Burton version of _Planet of the Apes_.
He has also played the title character "Yohan" as an old man in the Norwegian
film _Yohan-the Children Wanderer_. He co-starred in the 2011 film _Dolphin
Tale_ and its 2014 sequel, _Dolphin Tale 2_. In 2012, Kristofferson was in
_Joyful Noise_ with longtime friend, Dolly Parton. In 2013, Kristofferson co-
starred in _The Motel Life_ , as well as _Angels Sing_ with Willie Nelson and
Lyle Lovett. In 2006, Kristofferson starred with Genevi√®ve Bujold in an
interesting film _Disappearances_ about whiskey running from Quebec to the
States during the Great Depression.

After his singing success in the early 1970s, Kristofferson met singer Rita
Coolidge. They married in 1973 and released an album titled _Full Moon_ ,
another success buoyed by numerous hit singles and Grammy nominations.
However, his fifth album, _Spooky Lady's Sideshow_ , released in 1974, was a
commercial failure, setting the trend for most of the rest of his musical
career. Artists such as Ronnie Milsap and Johnny Duncan continued to record
Kristofferson's material with much success, but his distinctively rough voice
and anti-pop sound kept his own audience to a minimum. Meanwhile, more artists
took his songs to the top of the charts, including Willie Nelson, whose 1979
LP release of _(Willie Nelson) Sings Kristofferson_ reached #5 on the U.S.
Country Music chart and certified Platinum in the U.S.

In 1979, Kris Kristofferson traveled to Havana, Cuba, to participate in the
historic Havana Jam festival that took place between March 2‚Äì4, alongside Rita
Coolidge, Stephen Stills, the CBS Jazz All-Stars, the Trio of Doom, Fania All-
Stars, Billy Swan, Bonnie Bramlett, Mike Finnegan, Weather Report, and Billy
Joel, plus an array of Cuban artists such as Irakere, Pacho Alonso, Tata
G√ºines, and Orquesta Arag√≥n. His performance is captured on Ernesto Juan
Castellanos's documentary _Havana Jam '79_.

On November 18, 1979, Kristofferson and Coolidge appeared on _The Muppet Show_
, where Kristofferson sang "Help Me Make It Through the Night" with Miss
Piggy, Coolidge sang "We're All Alone" with forest animals, and the pair sang
"Song I'd Like to Sing" with the Muppet monsters.

In 1982, Kristofferson participated (with Willie Nelson, Dolly Parton, and
Brenda Lee) on _The Winning Hand_ , a double album consisting of remastered
and updated performances of recordings the four artists had made for the
Monument label during the mid-1960s; the album reached the top-ten on the U.S.
country album charts. He married again, to Lisa Meyers, and concentrated on
films for a time, appearing in _The Lost Honor of Kathryn Beck_ , _Flashpoint_
, and _Songwriter_ , the last of which also starred Willie Nelson.
Kristofferson was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song Score.
_Music from Songwriter_ (an album of duets between Nelson and Kristofferson)
was a massive country success.

Nelson and Kristofferson continued their partnership, and added Waylon
Jennings and Johnny Cash to form the supergroup The Highwaymen. Their first
album, _Highwayman,_ was a huge success, and the supergroup continued working
together for a time. The single from the album, also entitled "Highwayman",
and especially written for them by tunesmith Jimmy Webb, was awarded the ACM's
single of the year in 1985.[22] In 1985, Kristofferson starred in _Trouble in
Mind_ and released _Repossessed_ , a politically aware album that was a
country success, particularly "They Killed Him" (also performed by Bob Dylan),
a tribute to his heroes, including Martin Luther King, Jr., Jesus, and Mahatma
Gandhi. Kristofferson also appeared in _Amerika_ at about the same time, a
miniseries that attempted to depict life in America under Soviet control.

In spite of the success of _Highwayman 2_ in 1990, Kristofferson's solo
recording career slipped significantly in the early 1990s, though he continued
to record successfully with the Highwaymen. _Lone Star_ (1996 film by John
Sayles) reinvigorated Kristofferson's acting career, and he soon appeared in
_Blade_ , _Blade II_ , _Blade: Trinity_ , _A Soldier's Daughter Never Cries_ ,
_Fire Down Below_ , Tim Burton's remake of _Planet of the Apes_ , _Chelsea
Walls_ , _Payback_ , _The Jacket_ , and _Fast Food Nation_.

The Songwriters Hall of Fame inducted Kristofferson in 1985, as had the
Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame earlier, in 1977. 1999 saw the release of
_The Austin Sessions_ , an album on which Kristofferson reworked some of his
favorite songs with the help of befriended artists such as Mark Knopfler,
Steve Earle, and Jackson Browne. In 2003, _Broken Freedom Song_ was released,
a live album recorded in San Francisco.

In 2003, he received the "Spirit of Americana" free speech award from The
Americana Music Association.[23] In 2004, he was inducted into the Country
Music Hall of Fame. In 2006, he received the Johnny Mercer Award from the
Songwriters Hall of Fame and released his first album full of new material in
11 years; _This Old Road_. On April 21, 2007, Kristofferson won CMT's Johnny
Cash Visionary Award. Rosanne Cash, Cash's daughter, presented the honor
during the April 16 awards show in Nashville. Previous recipients include
Cash, Hank Williams, Jr., Loretta Lynn, Reba McEntire, and the Dixie Chicks.
"John was my hero before he was my friend, and anything with his name on it is
really an honor in my eyes," Kristofferson said during a phone interview. "I
was thinking back to when I first met him, and if I ever thought that I'd be
getting an award with his name on it, it would have carried me through a lot
of hard times."[24]

In July 2007, Kristofferson was featured on CMT's "Studio 330 Sessions" where
he played many of his hits.

On June 13, 2008, Kristofferson performed an acoustic in the round set with
Patty Griffin and Randy Owen (Alabama) for a special taping of a PBS
songwriters series to be aired in December. Each performer played 5 songs.
Kristofferson's set included "The Best of All Possible Worlds", "Darby's
Castle", "Casey's Last Ride", "Me and Bobby McGee", and "Here Comes that
Rainbow Again". Taping was done in Nashville.

Kristofferson released a new album of original songs entitled _Closer to the
Bone_ on September 29, 2009. It is produced by Don Was on the New West label.
Prior to the release, Kristofferson remarked: "I like the intimacy of the new
album. It has a general mood of reflecting on where we all are at this time of
life."[25]

On November 10, 2009, Kristofferson was honored as a BMI Icon at the 57th
annual BMI Country Awards. Throughout his career, Kristofferson's songwriting
has garnered 48 BMI Country and Pop Awards.[26] He later remarked, "The great
thing about being a songwriter is you can hear your baby interpreted by so
many people that have creative talents vocally that I don't have."[27]
Kristofferson had always denied having a good voice, and has said that as he's
aged, what quality it might once have had commenced to decay.[28]

In December 2009, it was announced that Kristofferson would be portraying Joe
in the upcoming album _Ghost Brothers of Darkland County_ , a collaboration
between rock singer John Mellencamp and novelist Stephen King.[29]

On May 11, 2010, Light in the Attic Records released demos that were recorded
during Kristofferson's janitorial stint at Columbia. _Please Don't Tell Me How
the Story Ends: The Publishing Demos_ is the first time these recordings have
been released and includes material that would later be featured on other
Kristofferson recordings and on the recordings of other prominent artists,
such as the original recording of "Me and Bobby McGee".

On June 4, 2011, Kristofferson performed a solo acoustic show at the Maui Arts
and Cultural Center, showcasing both some of his original hits made famous by
other artists, and newer songs.

In early 2013, Kristofferson released a new album of original songs called
_Feeling Mortal_. A live album titled _An Evening With Kris Kristofferson_ was
released in September 2014.

Kris Kristofferson voiced the character Chief Hanlon of the NCR Rangers in the
hit 2010 video game _Fallout: New Vegas_.

In an interview for Las Vegas Magazine Q&A by Matt Kelemen on October 23,
2015, he revealed that a new album, _The Cedar Creek Sessions_ , recorded in
Austin, would include some old and some new songs.[30] In December 2016, the
album was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Americana Album.[31]

Kristofferson covered Brandi Carlile's "Turpentine" on the 2017 album Cover
Stories.[32]

Kristofferson performed, with assistance from Brandi Carlile, the Joni
Mitchell composition _A Case of You_ , from the 1971 Mitchell album _Blue_ ,
on November 7, 2018 at the _Both Sides Now - Joni 75 A Birthday Celebration_
to celebrate the 75th birthday of Joni Mitchell.[33]

Kristofferson was announced on June 28 as being one of the supporting artists,
alongside Bryan Ferry, for a Barbra Streisand ‚Äòexclusive European concert‚Äô on
July 7, 2019 in London‚Äôs Hyde Park as part of the Barclay‚Äôs Summertime concert
series.

Kristofferson married Lisa Meyers in 1983. They own a home in Los Flores
Canyon in Malibu, California,[34] and maintain a residence in Hana on the
island of Maui.

Kristofferson has encountered a few serious medical issues in the past few
decades. He had successful bypass surgery in 1999, but from 2004 to 2015
suffered from what was finally diagnosed as Lyme disease, although it was
initially and incorrectly thought to be early onset Alzheimer's disease. It is
unclear how Kristofferson contracted Lyme disease but it is suspected that he
caught it while filming a movie in the remote woods of Vermont in 2002. His
wife credits the successful diagnosis and recovery to getting second opinions
when dealing with auto-immune and Alzheimer-type diagnoses. Kristofferson is
currently being treated by a specialist in California "who added antibiotic
intramuscular injections to Kris's protocol and is continuing to treat Kris",
his wife reported.[34][35]

Kristofferson has eight children from three marriages: daughter Tracy (b.
1962) and son Kris (b. 1968) from his first marriage to Fran Beer; daughter
Casey (b. 1974) from his second marriage, to Rita Coolidge; and Jesse (b.
1983), Jody (b. 1985), Johnny (b. 1988), Kelly Marie (b. 1990), and Blake (b.
1994) from his marriage to his current wife, Lisa (Meyers) Kristofferson.[36]

Kristofferson has said that he would like the first three lines of Leonard
Cohen's "Bird on the Wire" on his tombstone:[37]

Like a bird on the wire  
Like a drunk in a midnight choir  
I have tried in my way to be free

