**Kōichi Yamadera** (山寺 宏一, _Yamadera Kōichi_ , born June 17, 1961) is a
Japanese actor, voice actor, narrator and singer from Shiogama, Miyagi
Prefecture.[1][2] He graduated from Tohoku Gakuin University's economics
school and is currently affiliated with Across Entertainment. Before that, he
was affiliated with the Tokyo Actor's Consumer's Cooperative Society.[1]

His nickname is **Yama-chan** (山ちゃん).[1] As a radio personality, he is known
as **Bazooka Yamadera** (バズーカ山寺, _Bazūka Yamadera_ )[1] among other things. He
is best known for his roles in _Ninja Scroll_ (as Jūbei Kibagami), _Cowboy
Bebop_ (as Spike Spiegel), _Dragon Ball Super_ (as Beerus), _Ghost in the
Shell_ (as Togusa), _Neon Genesis Evangelion_ (as Ryoji Kaji), _Anpanman_ (as
Cheese), _Ranma ½_ (as Ryōga Hibiki/P-chan and the Jusenkyō Guide) and the
current voice of Koichi Zenigata ( _Lupin III_ ).[3] He's also known for
voicing Jim Carrey and Eddie Murphy in the Japanese language releases of their
respective films,[4] as well as being the official dubbed voice of Donald Duck
in Japanese.

He was the manager of the Tagajō Senior High School basketball team before he
made a name for himself. His voice acting debut was the OVA _Megazone 23_ as
the motorcycle-riding Shinji Nakagawa,[4] while his television debut was the
anime _Bosco Adventure_ as the cowardly Otter. Yamadera's break-out role as a
voice actor was the anime _Ranma ½_ , in which he played the dual role of
Hibiki Ryōga and the Jusenkyō Guide. In 1991, Yamadera joined forces with
Toshihiko Seki and Noriko Hidaka to form the acting unit Banana Fritters
(バナナフリッターズ, _Banana Furittāsu_ ), which disbanded in 1995. In October 1997,
Yamadera became a host on the TV Tokyo children's variety show _Oha Suta_.[4]

In 2011, Yamadera took over the role of Koichi Zenigata in _Lupin III_ media
from Gorō Naya.[5]

In a 2012 article by Japan Times, it was mentioned that he didn't consider to
do voice acting at first and he was interested to be in sales or as a live-
action actor.[6]

Yamadera married fellow voice actress Mika Kanai in May 23, 1993. They
divorced in 2006, although it wasn't publicized until 2007.[7][8][3] He
married Japanese voice actress Rie Tanaka on June 17, 2012, with a ceremony
held in Hawaii on January 3, 2013.[9] In August 2018, they announced they
filed for divorce.[10]

**Sources:**[12][13]

**Sources:**[13]

**Sources:**[2][4][12][13][18][19][20]

**Sources:**[13]

**Sources:**[13]

**Sources:**[2]

**Sources:**[1][18][19]

**Sources:**[77][78][79]

**Sources:**[1][2][80]

**Sources:**[13]

**Sources:**[1][13]

