**Francis Joseph "Lefty" O'Doul** (March 4, 1897 – December 7, 1969) was an
American Major League Baseball player who went on to become an extraordinarily
successful manager in the minor leagues. He was also a vital figure in the
establishment of professional baseball in Japan.

Born in San Francisco, California, O'Doul began his professional career as a
left-handed pitcher with the minor-league San Francisco Seals of the Triple-A
Pacific Coast League. He had some major-league success with the New York
Yankees and Boston Red Sox from 1919 to 1923 as a reliever.[1] He pitched in
one notable game on July 7, 1923, that would go down in the record books.
Relieving for starter Curt Fullerton, O'Doul gave up 16 runs over 3 innings of
relief, with 14 of those runs coming in the 6th inning alone. Although errors
committed by Red Sox fielders meant that only 3 of the 16 runs were earned,
O'Doul set the major league record for most runs allowed by a reliever in one
appearance,[2] a record later equaled by St. Louis Cardinals pitcher Johnny
Stuart in 1925 and Philadelphia Phillies pitcher Dutch Schesler in 1931
(although both needed 8 innings to allow 16 runs).[3] Following the season,
O'Doul developed a sore arm, which forced him to give up pitching.

After the 1923 season, the New York Giants returned O'Doul to the Pacific
Coast League, where he was converted to a power-hitting outfielder. In 1927,
he became one of what are today four Pacific Coast League hitters to have had
a 30 home runs, 30 stolen bases season, along with Joc Pederson (2014), Frank
Demaree (1934), and Hall of Famer Tony Lazzeri (1925).[4]

O'Doul returned to the majors in 1928, where he batted .319 as a platoon
player. In 1929, he was traded to the Philadelphia Phillies and, teaming up
with Chuck Klein, had one of the best offensive years in baseball history,
leading the league in batting at .398 with 254 hits, 32 home runs, 122 runs
batted in, and 152 runs scored. His hit total broke the previous National
League record of 250 by Rogers Hornsby of the 1922 St. Louis Cardinals. The
record was tied by Bill Terry in 1930.

After batting .383 with 22 homers during the 1930 season, O'Doul was traded to
the Brooklyn Robins (now the Los Angeles Dodgers). In 1932, he batted .368 for
Brooklyn to win another league batting title. After a slow start in 1933, when
he batted just .252 through 43 games, O'Doul was again traded, this time back
to the Giants. He rallied to hit .306 the rest of the way that season, but
played just one more year before ending his career in 1934.

In an 11-year major league career, he was in 970 games played, 34 games as a
relief pitcher and the rest as an outfielder, posting a .349 batting average
(1140-for-3264) with 624 runs scored, 175 doubles, 41 triples, 113 home runs,
and 542 RBI. His on-base percentage was .413 and slugging percentage was .532.
In seven seasons between 1928 and 1934, when he became a regular outfielder,
he hit .353 (1126-for-3192). O'Doul hit over .300 six times, missing only in
1933 when he hit .284 playing with the Dodgers and Giants. He had 200+ hit
seasons in 1929, 1930 and 1932. He had six five-hit games between 1929 and
1933, recording two each in 1929 and 1930 with the Phillies and one each in
1931 and 1933 with the Dodgers.

O'Doul then returned to the Pacific Coast League as manager of the San
Francisco Seals from 1935 to 1951, later managing several other teams in the
circuit and becoming the most successful manager in PCL history. One of his
outstanding accomplishments while managing the Seals was developing the young
Joe DiMaggio, who went on to a Hall of Fame career with the New York Yankees.
O'Doul refused to take credit for DiMaggio's success, saying "I was just smart
enough to leave him alone."[5]

O'Doul was instrumental in spreading baseball's popularity in Japan, serving
as the sport's goodwill ambassador before and after World War II. The Tokyo
Giants, sometimes considered "Japan's Baseball Team", were named by him in
1935 in honor of his longtime association with the New York Giants; the logo
and uniform of the Giants in Japan strongly resemble their North American
counterparts.

O'Doul was inducted into the San Francisco Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame in
1981 and the Japanese Baseball Hall of Fame in 2002. He has the highest career
batting average of any player eligible for the National Baseball Hall of Fame
who is not enshrined. His relatively short career as a full-time batter and
the fact that his statistics were accumulated during a period of historically
high offensive production in the major leagues are factors militating against
his selection to the Hall of Fame.

O’Doul was inducted into the Baseball Reliquary's Shrine of the Eternals in
2013.[6]

O'Doul's fame and popularity live on in his hometown of San Francisco and are
enhanced by the fact that his former team now thrives as the San Francisco
Giants. The popular hofbrau-style restaurant and bar he founded in 1958
operated for years after his death as Lefty O'Doul's Restaurant and Cocktail
Lounge[7] on Geary Street, still serving his original recipe for Bloody
Mary[8] (although one news account says it was modified in the 1960s by
O'Doul's bartender Chuck Davis).[9] However, a landlord-tenant dispute caused
it to close its doors in early 2017.[10] In November of 2018, the restaurant
reopened in a new location at Fisherman's Wharf.[11]

A bridge over McCovey Cove, near the Giants' home field of Oracle Park, is
named the Lefty O'Doul Bridge in his honor.[8] Accordingly, the ballpark plaza
and gate entrance adjacent to the bridge are also named after O'Doul.[12]

