**Leonard Kyle Dykstra** (/ˈdaɪkstrə/; born February 10, 1963), is an American
former professional baseball center fielder, who played in Major League
Baseball (MLB) for the New York Mets (1985 to 1989) and Philadelphia Phillies
(1989 to 1996).

The Mets signed Dykstra as a 13th round draft pick in 1981. A star in the
minors, in 1983 he led the Carolina League in at-bats, runs, hits, triples,
batting average and stolen bases. That season, he hit .358 with 8 HR, 81 RBI,
105 stolen bases (a league record for 17 years), 107 walks and only 35
strikeouts. He was consequently named the Carolina League's MVP, and soon
emerged as one of the Mets' prized prospects. While playing in Double-A in
1984 he befriended fellow outfielder and teammate Billy Beane, who later said
that Dykstra was "perfectly designed, emotionally" to play baseball and that
he had "no concept of failure." According to Beane, his first comments on
seeing Hall of Fame pitcher Steve Carlton warming up were, "Shit, I'll stick
him."[1]

In 1985 Dykstra, deemed ready for the major leagues, was promoted to the Mets
when the team's starting center fielder, Mookie Wilson, was placed on the
disabled list. The rookie's play and energy was a big boost to a Mets team
that surged to a 98-win season and narrowly missed out on the NL East crown.
The following season, Dykstra was intended to be platooned in center field
with Wilson, but took over the position as outright starter and leadoff hitter
when Wilson suffered a severe eye injury during spring training. Later that
season, the Mets released left fielder George Foster and moved Wilson to left.
Mets fans soon nicknamed Dykstra "Nails" for his hard-nosed personality and
fearless play. In 1986, he even posed shirtless for a "beefcake" poster under
the "Nails" nickname. Dykstra and #2 hitter Wally Backman were termed "the
Wild Boys" for their scrappy play as spark plugs for the star-studded Met
lineup.

With Dykstra as leadoff hitter, the 1986 Mets coasted to the division crown,
beating the second-place Philadelphia Phillies by 21.5 games en route to a
108–54 season. The Mets ended up in the World Series after a victory over the
NL West champion Houston Astros in the 1986 NLCS, 4 games to 2. Dykstra hit a
walk-off home run in Game 3, which is considered one of the biggest hits in
Mets franchise history and of Dykstra's career. He hit .304 in the 1986 NLCS,
and then .296 in the World Series against the Boston Red Sox. But his leadoff
home run in Game 3 at Fenway Park sparked the Mets, who had fallen behind 2
games to none even though those games were played at Shea Stadium. The home
run made him the third Met in team history (along with Tommie Agee and Wayne
Garrett, both of whose home runs also came in a Game 3, in the 1969 and 1973
World Series respectively) to hit a leadoff home run in the World Series.
Following Dykstra's home run, the Mets rallied to defeat the Red Sox in seven
games.

Dykstra continued to play in a platoon with Wilson.[2] In the 1988 NLCS
against the Los Angeles Dodgers, he continued his postseason success by
hitting .429 in a losing effort. But the Mets traded him to the Phillies on
June 18, 1989 with pitcher Roger McDowell and minor-leaguer Tom Edens for
second baseman Juan Samuel.[3] Teammate Keith Hernandez later characterized
Dykstra, in his book _Pure Baseball,_ as being "on the wild and crazy side",
which he cites as one of the reasons the Mets chose to trade him and the
Phillies chose to acquire him.[4]

Dykstra was initially upset over the trade since he enjoyed playing in New
York, but Phillies fans loved him and he soon became a fan favorite there as
well. He was known for his trademark cheek full of tobacco and hard-nosed
play.[5] With the Phillies, Dykstra's career was marked by incredible highs
and lows. In 1990, he started the All Star Game, led the league in hits and
finished fourth in batting average, hitting over .400 as late as June.

Dykstra's next two seasons were marred by injury. In 1991, while driving
drunk, he crashed his car into a tree on Darby-Paoli Road in Radnor Township,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania. Teammate Darren Daulton, his passenger, was
also injured. Dykstra suffered fractured ribs, a broken cheekbone and a
fractured collarbone, and lost two months of playing time. In late August he
re-broke his collarbone in Cincinnati running into the outfield wall and
missed the rest of the season.

On Opening Day 1992, Dykstra was hit by a pitch that broke his hand. He played
in just 145 of 324 possible games for the Phils in 1991 and 1992.

It all came together again in 1993 for Dykstra and the Phillies. The team,
which had been rebuilding since its last playoff appearance ten years before,
when they won the 1983 pennant but lost the World Series to Baltimore,
returned to the top of the National League East and won the pennant again. He
played in 161 games, setting a then major league record with 773 plate
appearances. Despite being overlooked for the 1993 All-Star team he led the
league in runs, hits, walks and at-bats, and was runner-up to the Giants'
Barry Bonds in voting for NL Most Valuable Player. He led the Phillies into
the World Series, which they lost to the defending World Series champion
Toronto Blue Jays in six games. In the series, Dykstra batted .348 and hit
four home runs, including two in a futile 15–14 loss at home in Game 4.

In October 2015, Dykstra told Colin Cowherd that beginning in 1993, he paid a
team of private investigators $500,000 to dig up dirt on MLB umpires. He used
the information, he said, to leverage a more favorable strike zone during
games. He said it was not a coincidence that he led the Majors in walks in
1993, going from 40 in 392 plate appearances in 1992 to 129 in 773 at-bats the
following year. In 1994, Dykstra walked 68 times in 386 plate appearances.[6]
Dykstra would play on two more All-Star teams in 1994 and 1995.

Injuries plagued Dykstra for the rest of his career. He last played in 1996,
although he launched one final comeback attempt in spring training of 1998
before retiring at the age of 35.

He first ran a car wash in Simi Valley, California, but sold it in 2007.[7]
Dykstra was sued in relation to the car wash in 2005. The lawsuit, filed by
former business partner Lindsay Jones, alleged that Dykstra used steroids and
told Jones to place bets on Phillies games in 1993, when Dykstra was on that
pennant-winning team. He denied those allegations,[8] but others arose when he
was cited in retrospect as a steroid-user during his playing career.[9]

In the meantime, Dykstra managed a stock portfolio and served as president of
several privately held companies, including car washes; a partnership with
Castrol in "Team Dykstra" Quick Lube Centers; a ConocoPhillips fueling
facility; a real estate development company; and a venture to develop several
"I Sold It on eBay" stores in populous areas of southern California. He also
appeared on Fox News Channel's _The Cost of Freedom_ business show, and his
stock-picking skills were even mentioned by Jim Cramer, who had Dykstra write
an investing column for TheStreet.

Dykstra then purchased NHL superstar Wayne Gretzky's $17 million estate (built
at a cost of $14,999,999[10]) hoping to flip it, but was unsuccessful. At one
point he owed more than $13 million on the house, and Lake Sherwood security
guards were eventually told to keep him away from the property because he had
stripped the house of over $51,000 worth of items (countertops, an oven and
hardwood flooring) and allowed the homeowners' insurance policy on the
property to lapse.[11] The house was eventually sold in January 2011 for "an
undisclosed amount". Jeff Smith, the second lien holder on the former Gretzky
mansion, said the property was listed on the market for $10.5 million, and
sources interviewed by CNBC said that Smith "did very well" with the sale.[12]

In 2000, Dykstra and other members of the 1986 Mets' World Championship team
threw out the ceremonial first pitch before Game 5 of the World Series at Shea
Stadium against the New York Yankees.[13][14] In 2002, Dykstra made another
much-anticipated return to New York after being elected to the Mets' 40th
Anniversary All-Amazin' Team.

He returned to Shea in 2006 for the Mets' 20th-anniversary celebration of
their 1986 World Championship. He then voiced a greater desire to get back
into baseball, and his name was mentioned as a possible Mets coach or even
manager. He also served as part-time instructor at the Mets' spring training
camp in Port St. Lucie.

He came back to Flushing for the last time on September 28, 2008, for the
Farewell to Shea Stadium ceremony held after the final game of that season.

In May 2011, Dykstra was sentenced to house arrest after a bankruptcy fraud
indictment. Under the terms of his plea agreement, he had been allowed to
leave the house only to go to work, attend church or be mandatorily drug-
tested.[15] Since his June 10 hearing for drug possession and grand theft
auto, he had been jailed awaiting trial for inability to post $500,000 bail.
He was also appointed a public defender.[16] On October 19, he pleaded no
contest to three grand theft auto charges and one count of filing a false
financial report. Sentencing, originally set for January 20, 2012, was
deferred pending completion of a drug and alcohol rehabilitation program. He
was finally sentenced to three years in prison on March 5, 2012.[17]

Starting in 2016, Dykstra has become a recurring guest on the Barstool Sports'
podcast segment, Locker Room Talk, during Pardon My Take hosted by Dan "Big
Cat" Katz and PFT Commenter. The segment involved the hosts prank-calling
Dykstra's personal cell phone and asking him vulgar questions. Most instances
of Locker Room Talk end with Dykstra angrily hanging up.

On June 28, 2016, Dykstra released an autobiography titled _House of Nails: A
Memoir of Life on the Edge._[18]

_House of Nails_ landed at No. 11 on the New York Times nonfiction best-seller
list for July 17, 2016.[19]

On October 5, 2016, Dykstra and Rebound Finance, a credit referral company,
announced their partnership. The partnership is still ongoing with Dykstra
acting as the brand's ambassador. According to a press release published by
Rebound Finance, the main goal of the partnership is to "provide hard working
Americans with the credit they deserve." [20][21]

To promote his new book and then, later on, his partnership with Rebound
Finance, Dykstra made several media appearances in 2016.

On June 28, 2016, Dykstra appeared on The Howard Stern Show for the first stop
on his promotional tour for his bestselling book _House of Nails: A Memoir of
Life on the Edge_ and to discuss his sexual conquests.[22]

July 27, 2016, Dykstra appeared on Larry King Now to discuss his book, his MLB
career, his use of steroids, and his close friendship with Charlie Sheen.[23]

Then, on November 28, 2016, Dykstra return to The Howard Stern Show, bringing
with him two women to verify the claims he made during his first visit in
June. Dykstra also promoted his partnership with Rebound Finance.[24]

Dykstra's son, Cutter, was drafted by the Milwaukee Brewers in the second
round of the 2008 Major League Baseball Draft,[25][26] and played in the
Washington Nationals organization until being released on June 14, 2016.[27]
Through Cutter's relationship with actress Jamie-Lynn Sigler,[28] Dykstra has
two grandsons.[29] Another son, Luke, was drafted by the Atlanta Braves in the
seventh round of the 2014 MLB draft and currently plays for the Sugar Land
Skeeters of the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball.

Dykstra's uncles, Pete, Jack, and Tony, played in the National Hockey
League.[30]

Lenny's wife, Terri, filed for divorce in April 2009.[31][32]

In September 2008, Dykstra began a high-end jet charter company and magazine
marketed to professional athletes known as the _Player's Club_ ,[33] LLC. The
magazine was part of a business plan to offer financial advice to professional
athletes, according to a profile article in the New Yorker magazine,[34]
Dykstra had a website entitled "Nails Investments" [35] to impart information
about his investment ideas.

In early 2009, stories and evidence began to emerge indicating that Dykstra's
financial empire was in a tailspin. A _GQ_ article by Kevin P. Coughlin, a
former photo editor for the _New York Post_ , detailed Coughlin's 67-day
employment with Dykstra producing _The Players Club_ , a magazine geared
toward athletes and their expensive lifestyles. Coughlin detailed incidents
and accused Dykstra of credit card fraud, failure to pay rent on the
magazine's Park Avenue offices or for bounced checks, lawsuits and printing
costs.[36]

An extensive article about an ESPN.com investigation in April 2009 went into
greater detail, asserting that Dykstra has been the subject of at least two
dozen legal actions since 2007.[37]

Dykstra, whose net worth was estimated at $58 million in 2008, filed for
Chapter 11 bankruptcy in July 2009, listing less than $50,000 in assets
against $10 million to $50 million in liabilities. He claimed to be a victim
of mortgage fraud after having lost the house purchased for $17.5 million from
Wayne Gretzky to foreclosure,[38] in the Sherwood Country Club development in
Thousand Oaks, California. [39]

According to the July 7, 2009 petition in the Bankruptcy Court for the Central
District of California [40] Dykstra's debts and creditors include $12.9m to
Washington Mutual (unsecured), $4m to Countrywide Financial /Bank of America
(unsecured), $3.5m to Rockridge Bank of Atlanta, $2.5m to David and Teresa
Litt,[41] $1.5m to K&L Gates (a large law firm), and smaller amounts to
others.

In August 2009, Dykstra was living out of his car and in hotel lobbies. The
estate purchased from Gretzky was riddled with water damage, torn-up flooring,
missing toilets, and other major damage. His second house, also in the
Sherwood development, was uninhabitable due to toxic mold. A dispute with his
insurance carrier over reimbursement for the necessary repairs.[
_clarification needed_ ] Fireman's Fund provided Mr. and Mrs. Dykstra with a
temporary residence pending resolution of the outstanding claim.[42] According
to papers filed in court, one of the houses in question was in "unshowable"
condition as "the home was littered throughout with empty beer bottles, trash,
dog feces and urine and other unmentionables." Raw sewage had been leaking
inside the house and electrical wiring had been damaged or removed by
vandals.[43][44]

On October 6, 2009, the _Wall Street Journal_ reported that Dykstra's World
Series ring had been auctioned off for $56,762 "to help pay the former major-
leaguer's $31 million debt."[45] On November 20, 2009 the case was converted
to a Chapter 7 bankruptcy to liquidate the estate and pay creditors.[46] In
June 2010, a court-appointed federal trustee in Dykstra's bankruptcy case
charged he had lied under oath, improperly hidden and sold assets and
repeatedly acted "in a fraudulent and deceitful manner" during his ongoing
bankruptcy case. The trustee accordingly asked the bankruptcy court to deny
Dykstra's request for a bankruptcy discharge.[47]

On April 13, 2011, Dykstra was arrested for investigation of grand theft by
Los Angeles police at his Encino home on suspicion of trying to buy a stolen
car, the day after Dykstra, in an unrelated federal complaint, had been
charged with embezzling from a bankruptcy estate. He faced up to five years in
federal prison if convicted. Federal prosecutors contended that after filing
for bankruptcy Dykstra hid, sold or destroyed more than $400,000 worth of
items from the $18.5 million mansion in question without permission of a
bankruptcy trustee. The items allegedly ranged from sports memorabilia to a
$50,000 sink. At one point, he sold "a truckload of furnishing and fixtures"
for cash at a consignment store, according to a statement from the U.S.
attorney's office.[48]

On June 13, 2011, Dykstra appeared in Federal bankruptcy court and pleaded not
guilty to thirteen charges. He was represented by a public defender.[49]
Dykstra faced up to 80 years in prison if convicted of all charges relating to
embezzlement, obstruction of justice, bankruptcy fraud, making false
statements to bankruptcy court, and concealing property from the bankruptcy
court.[50] The bankruptcy fraud trial was set to start on June 5, 2012.[51]

On July 13, 2012, Dykstra pleaded guilty in federal court to three felonies:
one count each of bankruptcy fraud, concealment of assets and money
laundering. He admitted to hiding, selling or destroying over $400,000 worth
of items that were supposed to be part of his bankruptcy filing.[52] On
December 3, 2012, he was sentenced to 6.5 months in prison and 500 hours of
community service, and ordered to pay $200,000 in restitution.[53] On June 21,
2013, Dykstra was released from prison.[54]

At approximately 1 a.m on May 7, 1991, Dykstra crashed his red Mercedes-Benz
SL 500[55] into a tree on Darby-Paoli Road in Radnor Township, Pennsylvania,
after attending the bachelor party of Phillies teammate John Kruk. Dykstra
suffered broken ribs, a broken collarbone and a broken facial bone, in
addition to second-degree burns on his left arm and lower back. Darren
Daulton, also a teammate, was a passenger in the car at the time; his injuries
included an injured eye and a broken facial bone. According to Radnor Township
Police, Dykstra's blood alcohol content was measured at 0.179% shortly after
the crash.[56]

In 1999, he was arrested for sexual harassment of a 17-year-old girl who
worked at his car wash, but the criminal charges were later dropped.[57]

In March 2009, press reports alleged that Dykstra's businesses were facing
financial ruin and that he had used offensive terms when speaking about
blacks, women and homosexuals.[58]

In September 2009, he was banned from both of his foreclosed multimillion-
dollar properties in Lake Sherwood, from which security officers were
instructed to deny him access. He was accused of vandalizing the properties
and not maintaining homeowners' insurance on them, and the court assigned a
trustee to manage them.[59]

In December 2010, Dykstra was accused of hiring a female escort and then
writing her a bad $1,000 check: adult-entertainment star and escort Monica
Foster claimed he had hired her on December 13, 2010 and then wrote her a
worthless check. Monica Foster later posted a copy of the check on her
blog.[60][61]

In January 2011, Dykstra was accused of sexual assault by his housekeeper, who
alleged that he would force her to give him oral sex on Saturdays. The woman
told investigators "she needed the job and the money, so she went along with
the suspect's requests rather than lose her job," according to the filing, and
"returned to work in the suspect's home with knowledge obtained from the
Internet about a claim of sexual assault by another woman."[62]

On April 14, 2011, Dykstra was arrested and charged with bankruptcy fraud. The
Los Angeles Police Department Commercial Crimes Division also arrested Dykstra
on separate grand theft charges related to the purchase of vehicles. He was
held on $500,000 bail.[63]

On June 6, 2011, Dykstra was arrested and charged with 25 misdemeanor and
felony counts of grand theft auto, identity theft, filing false financial
statements and possession of cocaine, ecstasy and the human growth hormone
(HGH) known as Somatropin.[64] He first pleaded not guilty to the charges, but
later changed his plea to no contest to grand theft auto and providing false
financial statements in exchange for dropping the drug charges.[65] On March
5, 2012, after unsuccessfully trying to withdraw his nolo-contendere plea, he
was sentenced to three years in state prison,[65] receiving nearly a year's
credit for time already served.[65]

On August 25, 2011, Dykstra was charged with indecent exposure. The Los
Angeles City Attorney accused him of placing ads on Craigslist requesting a
personal assistant or housekeeping services. The victims alleged that when
they arrived, they were informed that the job also required massage service.
Dykstra would then disrobe and expose himself.[66]

On May 23, 2018, Dykstra was arrested after uttering terroristic threats and
for possession of drugs. He allegedly held a gun to his Uber driver after the
driver refused to change destinations.[67] On October 10, 2018 Dykstra was
indicted by a New Jersey grand jury for cocaine and methamphetamine
possession, and making terroristic threats.[68]

On March 5, 2012, Dykstra was sentenced to three years in prison following the
above-cited no-contest pleas to charges of grand theft auto and filing a false
financial statement, in Los Angeles County Superior Court.[69] According to
court records and press reports, Dykstra and confederates had obtained
automobiles from various car dealerships using falsified bank statements and
stolen identities.

Dykstra was released from the federal penitentiary in Victorville, California
in July 2013 after serving six and one-half months of his sentence. He
finished his probation in April 2014, and had undergone weekly drug testing.
Now he lives with his ex-wife, Terri, who said that she has no plans to
remarry him.[70]

Dykstra was named in the Mitchell Report on steroid use in Major League
Baseball on December 13, 2007. The report cited multiple sources, including
Kirk Radomski, as stating that Dykstra had used anabolic steroids during his
MLB career.[71] It also stated that the Commissioner of Baseball's office had
known about Dykstra's steroid use since 2000. Dykstra did not agree to meet
with the Mitchell investigators to discuss the allegations.[72]

In Randall Lane's book titled _The Zeroes_ Dykstra admitted in his hotel room
to Lane, editor of _Trader Monthly_ , that he used steroids to perform better
than those he felt might replace him; otherwise, his $25 million would be "on
the line".

On December 20, 2007, Dykstra was also named in former MLB pitcher Jason
Grimsley's unsealed affidavit as an alleged user of steroids.[73]

  

