_Pretty Little Liars_ is an American teen drama television series created by
I. Marlene King for Freeform. It is based on Sara Shepard's novel series of
the same name. Below is a list consisting of the many characters who have
appeared throughout the series' seven-season run.

The following table contains an overall look on the main, recurring and guest
characters. The recurring and guest characters, marked in red and blue,
respectively, have appeared in more than five episodes in the respective
season they are pointed out. The main characters, marked in green, are those
whose portrayer has had received ensemble cast billing in at least one episode
in the season they are denoted.

The following list features characters that are considered fundamental to the
series' storylines, consisting of the central group deemed as "the Liars" and
the main antagonist "A."

Considered the "de facto leader" of the group, **Spencer Hastings** ,
portrayed by Troian Bellisario, is intelligent, extremely ambitious, and
strives for perfection in everything she does in an attempt to live up to the
high expectations of her parents. Spencer's biggest rival is her older sister,
Melissa, and the two are constantly fighting over something. Their
relationship is often strained by the fact that Spencer has a habit of
crushing on Melissa's boyfriends. In the first season, she begins a
relationship with fellow student and strained Rosewood student Toby Cavanaugh.
Throughout the series, Spencer is revealed to be the biological daughter of
Mary Drake and the sister of Charlotte Drake.

Considered the "alternative" one of the group, **Aria Montgomery** , portrayed
by Lucy Hale, is more outgoing in fashion and what she sees as acceptable
behavior. She moves back to Rosewood with her family after living in Iceland
for a year. Before Alison's death, she and Alison discovered that Aria's
father was having an affair with one of his former students, Meredith, who
became his coworker at Hollis College. Alison encourages Aria to tell her
mother the truth, but instead, Aria reluctantly agrees to keep her father's
secret. On top of that, she finds herself involved with her high school
English teacher, Ezra Fitz, after making out with him in a pub bathroom and
discovering he was her English teacher on the first day of school.

Pretty and fierce, **Hanna Marin** , portrayed by Ashley Benson, is the diva
and "it girl" of the group, having taken Alison's place as the most popular
girl at Rosewood High. Prior to Alison's death, Hanna suffered from bulimia,
which Alison frequently teased her over. Since her parents divorced, Hanna
permanently lives with her mother. She feels betrayed by her father, who has
remarried, and she does not get along well with his new wife and daughter.
When Hanna's mother falls upon financial hardship, she steals thousands of
dollars from the bank she worked at, which Hanna is forced to keep a secret.

The "jock" of the group, **Emily Fields** , portrayed by Shay Mitchell, is a
highly competitive swimmer, considered the star of Rosewood's swimming team.
She is shown as a sweet and shy young. For a short time, Emily lives with
Hanna, after her mother moves to Texas to live with Emily's father, who is
stationed in Fort Hood. She begins to question her sexuality because of her
feeling for Alison, but later accepts the fact that she is a lesbian and
starts to date girls. She eventually begins a relationship with Sara Harvey,
until she discovers that she is an ally of the antagonist.

The former "queen bee" of her clique, **Alison DiLaurentis** , portrayed by
Sasha Pieterse, used to be the most popular girl in school before her
disappearance and alleged death. Although she cared for her friends, she
enjoyed using their deepest secrets against them to keep them in line.
Charming and manipulative, Alison was skilled at finding ways to blackmail
everyone, and many people hated her. She knew everybody's secrets, but since
she's been gone her friends are beginning to realize how little they really
knew about her. She is revealed to be alive and on the run from "A."

A former "unpopular" girl at Rosewood, **Mona Vanderwaal** , portrayed by
Janel Parrish, longed to be accepted into Alison's group and was continuously
mocked by her. After Alison's disappearance, Mona befriended Hanna and they
underwent an "extreme makeover" together; as a result, they both became
popular students. When "A" appears, Mona becomes jealous of Hanna rekindling
her friendships with the other Liars. She dislikes Caleb and makes attempts to
break Hanna and Caleb up, though to no avail. She becomes romantically
involved with Noel, much to Hanna's disapproval, but is later dumped by him
for Jenna. When "A" begins sending Mona threatening notes, she grows closer to
the Liars. In the second-season finale, she is in fact revealed to actually be
"A" when she and Spencer travel to the Lost Woods Resort to uncover "A"'s
lair. She is committed to a mental institution, Radley, after being diagnosed
with borderline personality disorder.

The main antagonist, " **A** " is stalking and torturing the Liars in
relentless and creative ways and also threatens their friends and family. In
the second-season finale, it is revealed that Mona is "A". She is also the one
who stalked Alison before her disappearance. However, when she is sent to
Radley sanitarium, she is visited by CeCe Drake, who offers her a partnership
and takes over the team of "A's", known as the A-Team. The team consists of
Mona, Toby, Spencer, Sara, Lucas, Melissa, Wilden, Jenna, Noel, and Wren. Five
years later, Alex Drake takes over and becomes Uber A, known as "A.D.", and
forms the A.D. Team, consisting of Jenna, Sydney, Aria, Wren, Mona, and Mary.

The following characters are all family members and acquaintances of **Aria
Montgomery** , one of the protagonists of the series.

The following characters are all family members and acquaintances of **Spencer
Hastings** , one of the protagonists of the series.

The following characters are all family members and acquaintances of **Hanna
Marin** , one of the protagonists of the series.

The following characters are all family members and acquaintances of **Emily
Fields** , one of the protagonists of the series.

The following characters are all family members and acquaintances of **Alison
DiLaurentis** , one of the protagonists of the series.

