**London Records** (or **London Recordings** ) is a British record label that
marketed records in the United States, Canada, and Latin America from 1947 to
1979 before becoming semi-independent.

London arose from the split in ownership between the British and American
branches of Decca Records. The American branch of London Records released
British Decca records in the U.S. since British Decca could not use the
"Decca" name there. The label was noted for classical albums made in then
state-of-the-art stereophonic sound, and such artists as Georg Solti, Joan
Sutherland and Luciano Pavarotti.

The London name was also used by British Decca in the UK market for releases
taken from American labels which British Decca licensed, such as Imperial,
Chess, Dot, Atlantic, Specialty, Essex and Sun, and the first two UK releases
from Motown. By the 1960s more licensing deals had been made with Big Top,
Monument, Parrot, Philles, and Hi, and subsidiary labels were London Atlantic,
London Dot and London Monument (the last featuring Roy Orbison, who remained
with London in the UK even after he signed for MGM Records in the U.S.).

An unusual feature was the letter code in the numbering system. From the late
1950s until 1973, the label bore the logo "London American Recordings", and on
Radio Luxembourg it was known as "London American".

In America, the label was best known as the American imprint of the preâ€“1971
recordings of the Rolling Stones (currently owned by ABKCO). The label also
originally issued some early LPs and singles by Texas-based band ZZ Top (whose
catalog went to Warner Brothers when the band moved there).

In the late 1970s, London signed deals with Bomp! Records and with Big Sound
in Connecticut, U.S. This changed the label in the eyes of many from a
backwater into something a little more "edgy" compared to the pedestrian
contemporary releases from parent company Decca.

The president of London Records in the 1970s was D. H. Tollerbond.[1]

After British Decca was acquired by PolyGram in 1979, London followed a more
independent course with subsidiary labels such as Slash, Pete Tong's Essential
Records and FFRR.

Universal Music Group (the owner of American Decca) acquired PolyGram in
1998;[1] however, by this time, London Records had become a semi-independent
label within the PolyGram group operated by Roger Ames. In the 90's Tracy
Bennet became President and Colin Bell, Managing Director. When Ames moved to
the Warner Music Group, he took the label with him, and so almost all of
London's recent back catalogue was acquired by Warner, which also acquired the
London name and trademark from Decca [2] (which still owns pre-PolyGram back
catalogue). The name is still used, mainly for UK-based artists, and for ex-
Factory Records artists. Notable artists released by that incarnation of
London, called London Records 90, include New Order, Happy Mondays, A, and
Shakespears Sister.

After PolyGram took over British Decca, classical-music albums recorded by
British Decca continued to be released on the London label in the U.S., with a
logo similar to the Decca classical label logo, until American Decca owner
Universal bought British Decca owner PolyGram in 1998, after which they were
all reissued on the original British Decca label in the U.S.

The London pop music catalogue owned by Universal Music is now managed by
Polydor Records, with US distribution handled by Mercury Records. Decca
Records had a recording studio in Blomfield Road, West London; there may have
been another in London's West End. In 2010, Universal Music reclaimed
ownership of the London Records trademark. On 1 July 2011 Universal Music
reclaimed the London Records name and relaunched it under the executive team
of Nick Raphael (president) and later Jo Charrington (senior vice president of
A&R) who together previously ran Epic Records for Sony Music Entertainment
since 2001. Both had started their careers at London Records in the Ames era
in the 1990s.[2]

When Nick Raphael became president of Capitol Records's UK division in 2013,
London Records moved there,[3] where it currently operates as a subsidiary.

In July 2017, Because Music announced that it would acquire Warner Music 90,
the division of WMG that reissued most London Records artists from the
PolyGram era. [4] Because completed the deal in August 2017, which includes
the rights to over fifty London artists (including Bananarama and Happy
Mondays). With a new team in place London Records is now trading again as an
independent label.[5] Recent releases include 'Singles Party (1988-2019)'
which includes new music from Shakespears Sister plus reissues from
Blancmange, Bananarama, Bronski Beat, The Redskins and Goldie.

London Records had dozens of subsidiary and distributed labels throughout its
existence. Among the labels are:

