**Long John Silver's LLC** (also formerly known as **Long John Silver's
Seafood Shop** and sometimes abbreviated as **LJS** ) is an American fast food
restaurant chain that specializes in seafood. The brand's name is derived from
the novel _Treasure Island_ by Robert Louis Stevenson, in which the pirate
"Long John" Silver is one of the main characters.

Formerly a division of Yum! Brands, Inc., the company was divested to a group
of franchisees in September 2011, and is now 80% franchise owned.

The first restaurant was opened on August 18, 1969, in Lexington, Kentucky.[1]
The original location, on 301 Southland Drive just off Nicholasville Road, was
previously a seafood carry out restaurant named the Cape Codder. The original
Cape Codder concrete block building was redesigned by architect Druce Henn,
who created the New England style of LJS's early chain restaurants. That
original location is now a styling salon.[2][3]

Earlier restaurants were known for their Cape Cod style buildings, blue roofs
with square cupolas, wood benches/tables, lobster pots, and ship's wheels.
Later, more nautically themed decorations were added such as seats made to
look like nautical flags.

Those early restaurants also featured separate entrance and exit doors, a
corridor like waiting line area, deep fryer with food heaters that were
transparent so customers could see the food waiting to be served, and wrought
iron 'sword' door handles. A major exterior theme of these buildings had dock
like walkways lined with pilings and thick ropes.

Somewhat newer restaurants retained the basic structural design and theme but
eliminated most of the interior features. Its parent company, Jerrico was
taken private in 1989 through a highly leveraged management buyout, and one
year later the other restaurant concepts were divested in order to focus on
Long John Silver's.[4]

After struggling for the next several years under its heavy debt load, Jerrico
Inc. filed for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy in June 1998. In September 1999, A&W
announced to acquire the chain out of bankruptcy, as a result a new company
called Yorkshire Global Restaurants has been formed.

In 2000, Yorkshire Global Restaurants agreed to test multi branded locations
with Louisville, Kentucky based Tricon Global, owner of the KFC, Pizza Hut,
and Taco Bell chains.

The parent company of LJS and A&W, Yorkshire was acquired by Tricon Global and
Tricon was renamed to Yum! Brands, Inc in 2002, but by January 2011, Yum!
announced it was looking for a buyer for its Long John Silver’s and A&W All-
American Restaurants divisions, citing poor sales and a desire to transfer
more of its focus to international expansion.[5]

In September 2011, Yum! announced the impending sale of Long John Silver's to
LJS Partners LLC – a group consisting of franchisees and other private
investors.[6]

In July 2013, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, a nutrition and
health policy watchdog group, named Long John Silver's "Big Catch" meal the
worst restaurant meal in America, noting that it contained 33 grams of trans
fat, 19 grams of saturated fat, 1,320 calories, and almost 3,700 milligrams of
sodium.[7] In January 2014, the company announced that it had eliminated trans
fats from its menu.[8]

In March 2015, James O'Reilly, who had previously worked for KFC (another Yum!
Brands holding), was appointed as the CEO. He stated that he expected the
chain to maintain its 1,132 stores, refocus its marketing following negative
press about the fat and sodium content of the menu (see below), and looked to
the possibility of future expansion.[9]

On May 22, 2018, Long John Silver's announced the acquisition of seventy six
franchised restaurants primarily owned by ServUS located primarily in Indiana,
as well as renovating its restaurants.[10]

A co branded Long John Silver's and A&W in Gillette, Wyoming

A co branded KFC and Long John Silver's restaurant in Lafayette, Tennessee

A former co branded Long John Silver's and Taco Bell in Kent, Ohio before
becoming a Taco Bell store

