The **Los Alamos Neutron Science Center** ( **LANSCE** ), formerly known as
the **Los Alamos Meson Physics Facility** ( **LAMPF** ) is one of the world's
most powerful linear accelerators. It is located in Los Alamos National
Laboratory in New Mexico in Technical Area 53 (TA-53). It was the most
powerful linear accelerator in the world when it was opened in June 1972.[1]
The technology used in the accelerator was developed in part by the nuclear
physicist Louis Rosen. The facility is capable of accelerating protons up to
800 MeV. Multiple beamlines allow for a variety of experiments to be run at
once, and the facility is used for many types of research in materials testing
and neutron science. It is also used for medical radioisotope production.

LANSCE provides the scientific community with intense sources of neutrons with
the capability of performing experiments supporting civilian and national
security research. The Department of Energy, National Nuclear Security
Administration, Office of Science, Office of Nuclear Energy, and Office of
Science and Technology – the principal sponsors of LANSCE – have synergistic
long-term needs for the accelerator and neutron science that is the heart of
LANSCE.[ _citation needed_ ] LANSCE serves an international user community
conducting diverse forefront basic and applied research.

Since 1972, the 800-million-electronvolt (MeV) accelerator and its attendant
facilities at Technical Area 53 (TA-53, often referred to as "the Mesa") at
Los Alamos National Laboratory have been a resource to a broad international
community of scientific researchers. The Los Alamos Meson Physics Facility
(LAMPF), as it was originally called, hosted about 1000 users per year to
perform medium energy physics experiments.

In 1977, a pulsed spallation neutron source was commissioned to supply
moderated and unmoderated neutrons to time-of-flight experiments in the
facility called the Weapons Neutron Research (WNR) Center. Neutron scattering
experiments were started immediately and by 1983 the Department of Energy’s
Office of Basic Energy Sciences was funding a formal user program. Beginning
in 1985, with the completion of the Proton Storage Ring (PSR) that compresses
proton pulses from 750 microseconds to a quarter of a microsecond, the Los
Alamos Neutron Scattering Center (LANSCE), now known as the Lujan Center, was
established while WNR was expanded to other spallation sources on the
accelerator beam.

In 1995 LAMPF was renamed the Los Alamos Neutron Science Center (LANSCE) to
reflect the broad base of neutron research being conducted on behalf of the
weapons program and basic research; the name of the BES neutron scattering
facility was simultaneously changed from LANSCE to the Manuel Lujan Jr.
Neutron Scattering Center. In 1996, a Memorandum of Understanding was
established between the Department of Energy's Offices of Energy Research (ER)
and Defense Programs (DP) to define the stewardship of the facility and its
experimental areas in the context of the new Scientific Stockpile Stewardship
Program. In 2001, the MOU was rewritten to include three branches of the
Department of Energy (DOE)—the National Nuclear Security Administration
Defense Program (DP), the Office of Science (SC), and the Office of Nuclear
Energy (NE)—and the Laboratory officially designated LANSCE as an approved
user facility.

Several key events have occurred during the last 20 years that have fostered
the growth of the user programs at LANSCE. In 1968 through 1995, the DOE
Office of Energy Research (ER) funded LAMPF as a user facility for medium
energy physics and a user group was incorporated in 1972. Beginning
approximately in 1977, Office of Basic Energy Sciences has provided funding of
a new experimental area completed in 1990, including office space, the Los
Alamos Neutron Scattering Center (later the Los Alamos Neutron Science Center)
became a Designated National User Facility. [2] In 2011, this status was
extended to WNR and pRad.

Users conduct research at five facilities at LANSCE: Isotope Production
Facility (IPF), Lujan Neutron Scattering Center (Lujan Center), Proton
Radiography Facility (pRad), Ultracold neutrons (UCN), and Weapons Neutron
Research Facility (WNR)

A significant number of students and postdoctoral researchers who become
familiar with the Laboratory through their experiences at LANSCE become part
of the permanent workforce, joining many different technical organizations.
[3]

The User Program's demographics count user visits and unique-users. User
visits are the total number of visits by all users. A unique-user is defined
as counting a user only once— the first time they come to LANSCE during a
calendar year. The largest segment of unique-users at the Lujan Center came
from the academic community; at WNR users come from academic, industrial, and
national laboratories. A majority of the WNR industry users are from firms
that produce or use semiconductor devices. The semiconductor industry relies
on WNR's unique capabilities to test their latest generation of chips for
resistance to neutron-induced upsets. Neutron-induced upsets produced by
energetic neutrons are important due to the natural production of high-energy
neutrons by cosmic rays.[ _citation needed_ ]

Coordinates: 35°53′17″N 106°18′26″W﻿ / ﻿35.88807°N 106.30736°W﻿ / 35.88807;
-106.30736

