**Louisiana Tech University** , colloquially referred to as **Louisiana Tech**
, **La. Tech** , or simply **Tech** is a public research university in Ruston,
Louisiana. It is a space grant college, member of the Southeastern
Universities Research Association, member of the Association of Public and
Land-Grant Universities, and Carnegie Doctoral University with high research
activity (R2).[5] It is a member of the University of Louisiana System.

Louisiana Tech conducts research with ongoing projects funded by agencies such
as National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), the National Science Foundation (NSF), the
Department of Defense (DoD), and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
Louisiana Tech is one of fewer than 50 comprehensive research universities in
the nation and the only university in Louisiana to be designated as a National
Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education and Research
and a National Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education and
Research by the National Security Agency (NSA) and the United States
Department of Homeland Security (DHS).[6][7] Also, the FAA named Louisiana
Tech to the National Center of Excellence for Unmanned Aircraft Systems. The
university is known for its engineering and science programs.

Louisiana Tech opened as the **Industrial Institute and College of Louisiana**
in 1894 during the Second Industrial Revolution. The original mission of the
college was for the education of students in the arts and sciences for the
purpose of developing an industrial economy in post-Reconstruction
Louisiana.[8] Four years later in 1898, the state constitution changed the
school's name to **Louisiana Industrial Institute**. In 1921, the college
changed its name to **Louisiana Polytechnic Institute** to reflect its
development as a larger institute of technology. Under the leadership of F.
Jay Taylor, the college continued to grow and change over time. Louisiana
Polytechnic Institute became desegregated in the 1960s. It officially changed
its name to Louisiana Tech University in 1970 as it satisfied criteria of a
research university.

Louisiana Tech enrolled 12,463 students in five academic colleges during the
Fall 2018 academic quarter including 1,282 students in the graduate school.[2]
In addition to the main campus in Ruston, Louisiana Tech holds classes at the
Louisiana Tech University Shreveport Center, Academic Success Center in
Bossier City, Barksdale Air Force Base Instructional Site, and on the
CenturyLink campus in Monroe.

Louisiana Tech fields 16 varsity NCAA Division I sports teams (7 men's, 9
women's teams) and is a member of Conference USA of the Football Bowl
Subdivision. The university is known for its Bulldogs football team and Lady
Techsters women's basketball program which won three national championship
titles (1981, 1982, 1988) and made 13 Final Four appearances in the program's
history.

**Ruston College** , a forerunner to Louisiana Tech, was established in the
middle 1880s by W. C. Friley, a Southern Baptist pastor. This institution
lasted for seven years and had annual enrollments of about 250 students.[9]
Friley subsequently from 1892 to 1894 served as the first president of
Hardinâ€“Simmons University in Abilene, Texas, and from 1909 to 1910, as the
second president of Louisiana College in Pineville.

On May 14, 1894, the Lincoln Parish Police Jury held a special session to
outline plans to secure a regional industrial school. The police jury (a body
similar to a county court or county commission in other states) called upon
State Representative George M. Lomax to introduce the proposed legislation
during the upcoming session. Representative Lomax, Jackson Parish
Representative J. T. M. Hancock, and journalist, lawyer, and future judge John
B. Holstead fought for the passage of the bill. On July 6, 1894, the proposed
bill was approved as Act No. 68 of the General Assembly of Louisiana.[8] The
act established "The Industrial Institute and College of Louisiana", an
industrial institute created for the education of white children in the arts
and sciences.[8]

In 1894, Colonel Arthur T. Prescott was elected as the first president of the
college. He moved to Ruston and began overseeing the construction of a two-
story main building. The brick building housed eight large classrooms, an
auditorium, a chemical laboratory, and two offices. A frame building was also
built nearby and was used for the instruction of mechanics. The main building
was located on a plot of 20 acres (81,000 m2) that was donated to the school
by Francis P. Stubbs. On September 23, 1895, the school started its first
session with six faculty members and 202 students.

In May 1897, Harry Howard became the first graduate. Colonel Prescott awarded
him with a Bachelor of Industry degree, but there was no formal commencement.
The first formal commencement was held in the Ruston Opera House the following
May with ten graduates receiving their diplomas.

Article 256 of the 1898 state constitution changed the school's name to
Louisiana Industrial Institute.[10] Two years later, the course of study was
reorganized into two years of preparatory work and three years of college
level courses. Students who were high school graduates were admitted to the
seventh quarter (college level) of study without examination. As years went
by, courses changed and admissions requirements tightened. From 1917 to 1925,
several curricula were organized according to the junior college standards and
were offered leading to the Bachelor of Industry degree. In 1919, the Board of
Trustees enlarged the curricula and started granting a standard baccalaureate
degree. The first of these was granted on June 15, 1921, a Bachelor of Science
in Engineering.

The Constitution adopted June 18, 1921, changed the name of the school in
Article XII, Section 9, from Louisiana Industrial Institute to Louisiana
Polytechnic Institute.[11]

The Main Building, also known as Old Main, burned to the ground in 1936, but
the columns that marked the entrance remain in place behind Prescott Memorial
Library. By June 1936, construction on a new administration building had
begun. On completion in January 1937, it was named Leche Hall in honor of then
Governor Richard W. Leche of New Orleans. The building was renamed after the
death of former university president, J.E. Keeny, and remains the remodeled
Keeny Hall.

Louisiana Polytechnic Institute experienced an infrastructure growth spurt in
1939 and 1940. Seven buildings were designed by architect Edward F. Neild and
completed at a cost of $2,054,270. These were Aswell Hall (girls' dormitory),
Robinson Hall (men's dormitory for juniors and seniors), Tolliver Hall
(880-seat dining hall), Bogard Hall (the Engineering Building), the S.J. Wages
Power Plant, Reese Agricultural Hall (located on the South Campus Tech Farm),
and the Howard Auditorium & Fine Arts Building.[12]

During World War II, Louisiana Polytechnic Institute was one of 131 colleges
and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training
Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission.[13]

In 1959, four students were awarded the first master's degrees by the
institution.

In 1962, Foster Jay Taylor became the 12th President of the Louisiana
Polytechnic Institute, having succeeded Ralph L. Ropp. During his twenty-five
years at president, Dr. Taylor oversaw the transformation of the former
Louisiana Polytechnic Institute into Louisiana Tech University. The
university's enrollment grew from about 3,000 students in 1962 to roughly
12,000 students in 1987.

Most of the modern buildings on the Main Campus were either built or renovated
during Taylor's tenure as university president. The main athletic facilities
were constructed during the Taylor Era including Joe Aillet Stadium, the
Thomas Assembly Center, J.C. Love Field, and the Lady Techster Softball
Complex. In addition to the athletic facilities, the 16-story Wyly Tower,
Student Bookstore, Nethken Hall (Electrical Engineering building), the
University President's House, and the current College of Business Building
were built on the Main Campus. In order to house the increasing student body
of Louisiana Tech, Dr. Taylor led the construction of Graham, Harper, Kidd,
Caruthers, and Neilson residence halls.

Taylor's time as Louisiana Tech president also marked the beginning of Lady
Techster athletics. In 1974, Taylor established the Lady Techsters women's
basketball program with a $5,000 appropriation. He hired Sonja Hogg, a
28-year-old PE instructor at Ruston High School, as the Lady Techsters' first
head coach. Under Coach Hogg and her successor Leon Barmore, the Lady
Techsters won three National Championships during the 1980s.[15] In 1980, Dr.
Taylor founded the Lady Techster Softball team with Barry Canterbury serving
as the team's first head coach. The team made seven straight teams to the NCAA
Softball Tournament and three trips to the Women's College World Series during
the 1980s.

The first doctorate was awarded in 1971, a Ph.D. in chemical engineering.

In 1992, Louisiana Tech became a "selective admissions" university. This
university has increased their admissions criteria four times since 2000 by
raising the minimum overall grade point average, composite ACT score, and
class ranking.

Louisiana Tech has earned recognition from the Louisiana Board of Regents for
its graduation rate and retention rate. According to a report of the Louisiana
Board of Regents published in December 2011, Louisiana Tech has the second-
highest graduation rate among the fourteen public universities in the state of
Louisiana. The 53.3% 6-year graduation rate is the highest in the University
of Louisiana System.[16] Louisiana Tech has a 78.64% retention rate among
incoming freshmen who stay with the same school after the first year, the top
rate in the University of Louisiana System.[17] The average time-to-degree
ratio for Tech's graduates is 4.7 years, the fastest in the UL System.[18]

Louisiana Tech became the first in the world to confer a Bachelor of Science
degree in nanosystems engineering when Josh Brown earned his degree in May
2007.[19] Continuing its mission as an engineering pioneer, Louisiana Tech
also launched the nation's first cyber engineering BS degree in 2012.

As of May 2017[update], Louisiana Tech has awarded more than 100,900
degrees.[20]

The campus of Louisiana Tech University is located in Ruston, Louisiana. The
major roads that border or intersect the Tech campus are Tech Drive,
California Avenue, Alabama Avenue, and Railroad Avenue. Interstate 20 and U.S.
Highways 80 and 167 are located within one mile (1.6 km) of the Main Campus.
In addition, a set of railroad tracks operated by Kansas City Southern Railway
bisects the campus near Railroad Avenue.

The portion of the Main Campus located west of Tech Drive and north of the
railroad include all of the university's major athletic facilities except for
J.C. Love Field. The land east of Tech Drive and north of the railroad include
the Lambright Intramural Center, J.C. Love Field, and the University Park
Apartments. Most of the older residence halls are located near California
Avenue and along Tech Drive south of the railroad tracks. The older part of
the Main Campus is located south of Railroad Avenue. The Enterprise Campus is
located on a 50-acre (200,000 m2) plot of land east of Homer Street and
bordering the oldest part of the Main Campus.

In addition to the Main Campus, Louisiana Tech also has 474 acres (1.92 km2)
of land located on the South Campus, 167 acres (0.68 km2) of farm land west of
the Main Campus, 603 acres (2.44 km2) of forest land in Winn, Natchitoches,
and Union Parishes, 30 acres (120,000 m2) of land in Shreveport, a 44-acre
(180,000 m2) golf course in Lincoln Parish, 14 acres (57,000 m2) of land for
an arboretum west of the Main Campus, and a Flight Operations Center at Ruston
Regional Airport.[21]

The Main Campus at Louisiana Tech University originated in 1894 as a 20-acre
(81,000 m2) plot of land with only two buildings, The Old Main Building and a
frame building nearby used by the Department of Mechanics (the forerunner of
the College of Engineering and Science). Today, the Main Campus is housed on
280 acres (1.1 km2) of land with 86 buildings including 22 apartment buildings
for the University Park Apartments on the north part of the campus.[21] Many
of the buildings, especially the older buildings, on the Main Campus are built
in the Colonial Revival style.[22] Bogard Hall, Howard Auditorium, Keeny Hall,
University Hall (formerly the original Prescott Library), Reese Hall, Robinson
Hall, and Tolliver Hall are all included on the National Register of
Historical Places.[23]

The oldest existing building on Louisiana Tech's campus is the Ropp Center.
The Italian-style, wood-frame house was constructed in 1911 and is named after
Ralph L. Ropp, Louisiana Tech's President from 1949 to 1962. The Ropp Center
served as the home of seven Louisiana Tech Presidents until a new president's
house was built in 1972 on the west side of Tech's campus. The Ropp Center was
used by the College of Home Economics for thirteen years until the Office of
Special Programs moved into the building in 1985. In 2002, a $1 million
renovation was completed to transform the Ropp Center into a faculty and staff
club that is used for special events and housing for on-campus guests.[24]

The Quadrangle (the Quad) is the focal point of the oldest part of the Main
Campus. The Quad is considered to be one of the most peaceful and beautiful
locations at Louisiana Tech.[25] Large oak trees and park benches all around
the Quad provide students and visitors a quiet place to study and relax. At
the center of the Quad is The Lady of the Mist sculpture and fountain, a
landmark for students and alumni alike. The buildings surrounding the Quad are
Keeny Hall, Howard Auditorium, the Student Center, the Bookstore, the Wyly
Tower of Learning, the current Prescott Memorial Library, and the original
Prescott Library now known as University Hall.

Another popular location on the Main Campus is Centennial Plaza. In 1994,
Centennial Plaza was constructed to commemorate the 100th anniversary of
Louisiana Tech's founding. The plaza was funded by a student self-assessed fee
and designed specifically for the use and enjoyment of the student body.
Centennial Plaza is used for special events throughout the year, such as
Christmas in the Plaza, movie events, and student organizational fairs.
Centennial Plaza is one of the main gathering points of the students due to
the plaza's close proximity to the on-campus restaurants, coffee shops, dining
halls, university post office, and offices for Student Life, SGA, and Union
Board. At the center of the plaza is the Clock Tower which has the sound and
digital capabilities to play the Alma Mater, Fight Song, and any other songs
and calls as needed. The Alumni Brick Walkway runs through Centennial Plaza
and around the Clock Tower.[26] A large Louisiana Tech seal marks the middle
of Centennial Plaza just west of the Clock Tower. Centennial Plaza is enclosed
by Tolliver Hall, the Student Center, Howard Auditorium, and Harper Residence
Hall.

Louisiana Tech has two main dining halls on Wisteria Drive on the west end of
Centennial Plaza. The first dining hall is the Student Center which is home to
the cafeteria, a smaller dining hall for eating and socializing, the La Tech
Cafe, several small restaurants including Chick-fil-A, and the Tonk. The
Student Center is also home to the CEnIT Innovation Lab, several large study
areas, and a conference room. One of the three bronze bulldog statues is
located on the first floor of the Student Center near the entrance of the
Tonk. Students pet the bulldog statue for good luck as they walk by the
statue.

The second student center on the Tech campus is Tolliver Hall. Tolliver Hall,
named after Tech's first full-time dietitian Irene Tolliver, is located at the
west end of Centennial Plaza near the Wisteria Student Center. This two-story
building was built in the 1920s as one of three dining halls at Louisiana
Tech. The eating area in the second floor remained open until it was shut down
in the 1980s. In 2003, nearly $3 million was spent to renovate Tolliver Hall
into a modern cyber student center. The second floor now houses a cyber cafe
which includes computer stations, a McAlister's Deli restaurant, several
smaller restaurants, a large dining area with big-screen televisions, and
smaller tables surrounding the floor for dining and studying. The offices of
the Louisiana Tech Student Government Association, Union Board, the
International Student Office, and multicultural affairs are also housed on the
second floor. The first floor is used as the post office for Tech's students,
faculty, and administration officials.[27]

In the past decade, Louisiana Tech built new buildings and renovated some of
the Main Campus' older buildings. The university erected Davison Hall (home of
the university's Professional Aviation program), the Micromanufacturing
Building, and the Biomedical Engineering Building on the south end of the Main
Campus along Hergot Avenue. Tech tore down the old Hale Hall and constructed a
brand-new Hale Hall in the style and design of the predecessor in 2004.[28] On
the eastern edge of the campus, the university renovated the building now
known as University Hall, redesigned the bookstore interior, and made needed
repairs to Keeny Hall and Howard Auditorium. All of the major athletics
facilities on the north part of the Main Campus have received major upgrades
and renovations in the past five years.

Construction started in early 2011 on a new College of Business building. The
42,000-square-foot (3,900 m2) facility serves as the centerpiece of the
entrepreneurship and business programs of the College of Business. The
building features new classrooms, two auditoriums, computer labs, research
centers, meeting rooms, and career and student support centers. [29] Louisiana
Tech has announced plans to construct a new 60,000-square-foot (5,600 m2)
College of Engineering and Science building adjacent to Bogard Hall.

The campus also hosts the Idea Place,[30] a science museum; A.E. Phillips Lab
School, a K-8 school which is recognized as a "Five Star School" by the
Louisiana Department of Education;[31] and the Joe D. Waggonner Center for
Bipartisan Politics and Public Policy.[32]

South Campus is located southwest of the main campus in Ruston and covers
nearly 900 acres (364 ha). It is home to the School of Agricultural Science
and Forestry, Center for Rural Development, Equine Center, John D. Griffin
Horticultural Garden, and Tech Farm. The Tech Farm Salesroom markets dairy,
meat, and plant products produced and processed by Tech Farm to the public.
Students enrolled in agriculture or forestry programs attend classes in Reese
Hall, the agricultural laboratory, and in Lomax Hall, the forestry and plant
science complex which is home to the Louisiana Tech Greenhouses, Horticultural
Conservatory, and the Spatial Data Laboratory.

In Fall Quarter 2009, the university broke ground on the new Enterprise Campus
which will expand the campus by 50 acres (20 ha) upon completion. The
Enterprise Campus will be a green building project and will be a research
facility available to technology companies and businesses. The Enterprise
campus will also try to bridge the Engineering and Business colleges with the
addition of the Entrepreneurship and Innovation Center (EIC).[33]

In 2010, Louisiana Tech finished the renovations of the old Visual Arts
Building by transforming that building into the new Entrepreneurship and
Innovation (E&I) Center. The E&I Center will serve as the central hub for the
Center for Entrepreneurship and Information Technology's (CEnIT) programs and
is located between the College of Business building and Bogard Hall (COES).

Louisiana Tech broke ground on Tech Pointe, the first building on the
Enterprise Campus, in 2010. Tech Pointe will house the Cyberspace Research
Laboratory as well as high-tech companies and start-up technology companies.
The 42,000-square-foot (3,900 m2) facility will include access to the
Louisiana Optical Network Initiative (LONI), fiber-optic and Internet
networks, advanced computing capabilities, and other information technology
supports needed to meet the demands of 24/7 high-tech companies and
specialized cyber security research. Tech Pointe is scheduled for completion
sometime in 2011.

The university recently unveiled plans to build a new College of Engineering
and Science (COES) building. The three-story, 127,000[34]-square-foot (11,800
m2) building will provide new active learning class labs; engineering shops;
and meeting rooms for classes in math, science, and engineering. The new COES
building will provide new learning space for the university's first-year and
second-year engineering and science students for the first time since the
completion of Bogard Hall in 1940.[35] Upon completion of the new College of
Engineering and Science building, Louisiana Tech plans to renovate and improve
Bogard Hall.

Since September 1965, Louisiana Tech has offered on-base degree programs
through its satellite campus at Barksdale Air Force Base in Bossier City,
Louisiana. The university works in conjunction with the Department of the Air
Force to provide postsecondary education programs that are designed to meet
the needs of Air Force personnel. While the primary focus of the Barksdale
campus is to educate Air Force personnel, civilians are permitted to take part
in the classes offered at the Barksdale campus if space is available. All
courses offered at Tech Barksdale are taught on-base or online. The
administrative offices for the Louisiana Tech Barksdale Air Force Program are
located in the Base Education Center.[21]

As of the Fall 2018 quarter, Louisiana Tech had an enrollment of 12,463
students pursuing degrees in five academic colleges.[2] The student body has
members from every Louisiana parish, 43 U.S. states, and 64 foreign
countries.[36][37] Louisiana residents account for 85.0% of the student
population, while out-of-state students and international students account for
11.1% and 4.0% of the student body, respectively.[38][39] The student body at
Louisiana Tech is 69.4% white, 13.3% black, 3.8% international students, and
13.5% other or "unknown" ethnicity.[40] The student body consists of 50.2%
women and 49.8% men.[40]

The Fall 2016 incoming freshmen class at Louisiana Tech consisted of 2,018
students.[41] This incoming freshmen class had an average 24.7 ACT score, with
31% scoring between 27â€“36 and 45% scoring between 22â€“26.[41] Of the 2015
freshmen class, 83.0% are Louisiana residents, 16.3% are out-of-state
students, and 0.7% are international students.[41] Louisiana Tech's 2015
freshman class includes ten National Merit Scholars and one National
Achievement Scholar.[42]

As of Fall 2015, the College of Engineering and Science had the largest
enrollment of any college at Louisiana Tech with 22.9% of the student
body.[40] The College of Education, College of Liberal Arts, the College of
Applied and Natural Sciences, and the College of Business had 18.4%, 14.0%,
13.1%, and 9.5%, respectively.[40] About 22.2% of the student body were
enrolled in Basic and Career Studies.[40]

In the 2020 _U.S. News and World Report_ ranking of public universities,
Louisiana Tech is ranked 135th, and Louisiana Tech is ranked in Tier One of
national universities at 272nd.[48] _Forbes_ 2019 edition of _America's Top
Colleges_ ranked Louisiana Tech as the 132nd best public college in the
nation, the 170th best research university in the nation, the 397th best
college overall, and the 81st best college in the South.[49] According to
_Washington Monthly_ 's _2019 National University Rankings_ , which consider
research, community service, social mobility, and net price of attendance,
Louisiana Tech ranked 317th nationally.[50] The _Wall Street Journal/Times
Higher Education College Rankings 2019_ ranked Louisiana Tech 601â€“800th in the
United States.[51] _Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2020_
which measure an institutionâ€™s performance across teaching, research,
knowledge transfer, and international outlook ranked Louisiana Tech 801â€“1000th
in the world.[52] _Times Higher Education World University Rankings_ named
Louisiana Tech one of twenty universities in the world that are rising stars
and could challenge the elites to become globally renowned by the year
2030.[53]

_Money_ magazine named Louisiana Tech the best college in Louisiana in their
2016 _The Best College in Every State_ publication.[54] In addition, Louisiana
Tech ranked 235th in _Money's Best Colleges_, which ranked schools based on
value by assessing educational quality, affordability, and alumni success.[55]
_Forbes_ 2019 edition of _America's Best Value Colleges_ ranked Louisiana Tech
as the 159th best overall value for all American colleges and
universities.[49] In the 2018 _Kiplinger's Personal Finance Best College
Values_ rankings, Louisiana Tech ranked No. 1 for all Louisiana public
colleges, 65th of all public colleges in the nation, and 189th of all public
and private colleges in the United States.[56] In the 2016 _U.S. News and
World Report Best Colleges_ rankings, Louisiana Tech ranked No. 1 among public
national universities and 6th among all national universities for graduating
students with the least amount of debt.[57] Louisiana Tech ranked 6th in
_Business Insider'_s 2015 _Most Underrated Colleges In America_ rankings.[58]
According to the _2015â€“2016PayScale College Salary Report_ salary potential
for all alumni, Louisiana Tech ranks first among all public and private
institutions in Louisiana, 60th nationally among public schools, 84th
nationally among research universities, and 184th nationally among all
universities and colleges.[59][60][61][62]

In the 2020 _U.S. News and World Report Best Colleges_ rankings, Louisiana
Tech's undergraduate engineering program ranked 134th in the nation, and
Tech's undergraduate business program ranked 224th.[48] In the 2019 _U.S. News
and World Report Best Grad Schools_ rankings, Louisiana Tech ranked 145th in
engineering, 141st in speech-language pathology, and 185th in education.[63]
According to the Association for University Technology Managers, Louisiana
Tech is ranked as the nation's 2nd best academic institution for innovation
productivity as measured by number of new inventions generated per research
dollar expended.[64]

The university confers associate's, bachelor's and master's degrees through
its five academic colleges. Additionally, Louisiana Tech offers doctoral
degrees in audiology, business administration, counseling psychology
(accredited by the American Psychological Association),
industrial/organizational psychology, computational analysis and modeling,
engineering, and biomedical engineering, with a joint MD-PhD program with the
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center Shreveport.

**College of Applied and Natural Sciences**

The College of Applied and Natural Sciences is made up of the School of
Agricultural Sciences and Forestry, School of Biological Sciences, Department
of Health Informatics and Information Management, School of Human Ecology, and
Division of Nursing.

**College of Business**

The College of Business is divided into the Departments of Accounting,
Economics & Finance, Graduate Studies & Research, Management & Information
Systems, and Marketing & Analysis.

Louisiana Tech College of Business also houses Academy of Marketing Science.
Academy of Marketing Science is the premier body of both national and
international marketing scholars. Academy of Marketing Science publishes the
top marketing journal -"The Journal of Academy of Marketing Science". College
of Business has one of the strongest professional selling and sales management
scholarship.[65]

The College of Business holds the charter of the Eta Tau chapter of Alpha
Kappa Psi Professional Business Fraternity Inc. The Eta Tau chapter was
chartered in 1967. As a professional fraternity it promotes and fosters the
study of business. However, first and foremost, it is a source of brotherhood
among students within the University. The fraternity is highly selective, co-
ed, and open to students of all-majors.

In 2009, Louisiana Tech launched their Executive Master of Business
Administration (EMBA) program designed specifically for executives and
managers. The curriculum of the EMBA program places an emphasis on strategic
thinking, leadership skills, and management decision-making. The 30 credit
hour (10 course) program is taught at the Technology Transfer Center in
Shreveport and the CenturyLink headquarters in Monroe. The Shreveport EMBA
program hosted their first EMBA class in January 2009, and the second group of
EMBA students started their studies at Shreveport in 2011. The Monroe EMBA
program held their first EMBA class in January 2010 in conjunction with the
University of Louisiana at Monroe's College of Business, and their second
group of EMBA students are scheduled in start their classes in 2012.[66]

**College of Education**

The College of Education traces its mission back to the origins of Louisiana
Tech in 1894, where the preparation of teachers was one of the early missions
of the institution.[67] In 1970, the School of Education was elevated to the
level of College.

Today, the College of Education consists of three separate departments: The
Department of Curriculum, Instruction, and Leadership, The Department of
Kinesiology, and The Department of Psychology and Behavioral Sciences.
Together, the three academic departments award thirty-five different academic
degrees ranging from the baccalaureate to the doctoral levels.

Notable subdivisions of the College of Education include A.E. Phillips
Laboratory School, the Science and Technology Education Center, the NASA
Educator Resource Center, The IDEA Place, and the Professional Development and
Research Institute on Blindness.

**College of Engineering and Science**

The College of Engineering and Science (COES) is the engineering school at
Louisiana Tech University. The COES offers thirteen undergraduate degrees
including seven engineering degrees, two engineering technology degrees, and
four science degrees. The college also offers seven Master of Science degrees
and four Doctorate degrees.

The college started as the Department of Mechanics in 1894 with a two-year
program in Mechanic Arts. Since its founding, the college expanded its degree
program to include chemical engineering, civil engineering, electrical
engineering, industrial engineering, and mechanical engineering. The COES
began offering one of the first biomedical engineering curriculum programs in
the United States in 1972 and the first nanosystems engineering BS degree in
2005. Louisiana Tech launched the nation's first cyber engineering BS degree
in 2012.

Bogard Hall is the second and current home of the College of Engineering and
Science. Louisiana Tech constructed the building in 1940 and named it after
Frank Bogard, the former Dean of Engineering at Louisiana Tech.[68] The
college also utilizes Nethken Hall, the Biomedical Engineering Building, the
Institute for Micromanufacturing, and parts of Carson-Taylor Hall for the
college's activities. In early 2011, Louisiana Tech announced plans to
construct a new Integrated Engineering and Science Building adjacent to Bogard
Hall. The 60,000-square-foot (5,600 m2) building will provide new classrooms,
shops, and meeting rooms for engineering, science, and math students at
Louisiana Tech. When the new engineering building is complete, the university
will begin renovations of Bogard Hall.[69]

**College of Liberal Arts**

The College of Liberal Arts consists of nine academic departments:
Architecture, Art, History, Journalism, Literature and Language, Performing
Arts, Professional Aviation, Social Science, and Speech.[70] The college
offers 26 degree programs, including 19 bachelors, 6 masters, and the
doctorate degree in audiology

The College of Liberal Arts hosts the Louisiana Tech University Honors
Program.[71] Tech's Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) Detachment
305 is also part of the College of Liberal Arts.[72]

**Center for Entrepreneurship and Information Technology (CEnIT)**

In 2001, Louisiana Tech proposed the creation of the Center for
Entrepreneurship and Information Technology (CEnIT), a collaboration between
the College of Engineering & Science (COES) and the College of Business (COB).
The CEnIT focuses the resources of the two colleges and their related centers
in promoting entrepreneurial research, technology transfer, and education. The
CEnIT was approved in 2002 by the University of Louisiana System Board of
Supervisors and the Louisiana Board of Regents. As of 2011[update], the CEnIT
is housed in the 3,000-square-foot (280 m2) CEnIT Innovation Lab on the main
floor of the Student Center next to The Quad.[73] The center will move to the
newly renovated University Hall building located next to the College of
Business sometime in 2011.[74]

The Top Dawg Competition was created in 2002 by the Association of Business,
Engineering, and Science Entrepreneurs (ABESE), now known as Bulldog
Entrepreneurs. The annual competition is hosted by Bulldog Entrepreneurs and
in conjunction with the CEnIT, COES, College of Business, and the Technology
Business Development Center (TBDC). The competition started as the Top Dawg
Business Plan Competition in 2002 and expanded six years later to include the
Idea Pitch Competition. Participants in the Top Dawg Competition create teams
to develop innovative ideas into real businesses and showcase intellectual
properties developed by Louisiana Tech researchers and students. The teams
must foster an idea, create a business plan, and compete for cash prizes and
resources needed to further develop the team's concept.[75] The total amount
of money awarded during each competition to the competing teams has grown
since 2002 to $14,500 for the 2011 Competition. In addition to prize money
from the COES and College of Business, additional prize money is awarded by
Jones Walker, Louisiana Tech's Innovation Enterprise Fund, and the Ruston-
Lincoln Parish Chamber of Commerce.[76]

**Global_Campus**

Louisiana Tech established the Global_Campus on September 16, 2008. The campus
offers a variety of degree programs, certificate programs, and general
education courses. Global_Campus focuses on providing more flexibility and
choices to Tech's traditional students and complete online education services
to non-traditional students, such as military, international, and dual
enrollment students.[77]

As of 2011[update], Global_Campus offers over 275 distance learning courses
while more courses are in development. Louisiana Tech has six master's degree
programs, two bachelor's degree programs, and one associate degree program
available via distance learning. In addition to the nine degree programs,
Global_Campus offers eight professional development programs.[78]

**CenturyLink@LaTech**

In the Fall of 2011, Louisiana Tech and CenturyLink created a partnership
called "CenturyLink@LaTech" to meet the workforce development and training
needs of CenturyLink. It is designed for CenturyLink employees with general
responsibilities and interests in telecommunications engineering, information
technology or information systems.[79]

CenturyLink@LaTech offers a Communications Systems Graduate Certificate.[80]

Louisiana Tech has over 163 officially recognized student organizations.[81]
Students can opt to participate in Student Government, Union Board, _The Tech
Talk_ , TechTV, Lagniappe, Greek, religious, honor, service, spirit,
intramurals, club sports, pre-professional, and special interest
organizations.

The Louisiana Tech University Union Board organizes entertainment activities
for Louisiana Tech students throughout the entire school year. About 80
students participate in Union Board each academic school year. The Union Board
receives an annual budget of about $210,000 in Student Assessment Fees and
uses the money to organize and produce the annual Fall Fling, Talent Show,
Spring Fling, Tech the Halls, the Miss Tech Pageant, RusVegas casino night,
and other special events.[82]

The Student Government Association (SGA) is the official governing body of the
Louisiana Tech University Student Association (the student body) and consists
of three branches; the Student Senate, Executive Branch, and the Supreme
Court.[83] The organization is responsible for the Welcome Week/Dawg Haul
activities, Homecoming Week, the Big Event, short term student loans, voter
registration drives for the student body, and other various activities
throughout the year.[84]

Louisiana Tech and neighboring Grambling State University operate an ROTC
exchange program. Louisiana Tech operates the Air Force ROTC while Grambling
operates the Army ROTC, and students from either school may participate in
either program.

Since 2006, Louisiana Tech has played host to Summer Leadership School for Air
Force Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps cadets from public school systems
all over the United States. It is operated by normal USAF retirees, but mostly
by college level Cadet Training Officers. These sessions are held towards the
end of the month of June for nine days.

_The Tech Talk_ is Louisiana Tech's official student newspaper since 1926. The
Tech Talk is published every Thursday of the regular school year, except for
finals week and vacation periods.[85] The award-winning newspaper has been
honored in the past few years by the Southeast Journalism Conference
(SEJC),[86] Louisiana Press Women,[87] National Federation of Press Women,
Louisiana Press Association, and the Society of Professional Journalists. The
Tech Talk was named the 10th Best Newspaper in the South in 2010 and the 3rd
Best Newspaper in the South in 2011 by the Southeast Journalism
Conference.[88]

_Speak Magazine_ is Louisiana Tech's student magazine. It has been published
quarterly since 2014.[89]

The _Lagniappe_ is Tech's yearbook. The Lagniappe, which literally means
"something extra" was first published in 1905 and has been published every
year since except for 1906, 1913â€“1921, 1926, and 1944â€“1945.[90] The yearbook's
annual release date is around the last week of the regular school year in the
middle of May. The Lagniappe was recognized in May 2011 as "First Class" by
the Associated Collegiate Press and as one of the top 2 percent of high school
and collegiate yearbooks by Balfour Publishing's "The Yearbook's Yearbook".
Mary May Brown, the recently retired faculty advisor of the Lagniappe for 23
years was named the Collegiate Publications Advisor of the Year by the
Louisiana Press Women in 2011.

Louisiana Tech's local radio station is KLPI. The radio station was founded as
WLPI-AM in 1966 and originally housed in a rented office on Railroad Avenue in
downtown Ruston. By 1974, construction was completed on KLPI-FM, and the radio
station began broadcasting at 10 watts. Afterward, WLPI-AM was shut down due
to maintenance problems with the station's equipment. Today, KLPI transmits at
4,000 watts of power and is located at the southeast corner of the Student
Center at the heart of the Tech campus.[91]

Louisiana TechTV is the official student-run television station at Louisiana
Tech since its launch in 2000. TechTV shows newly released movies, TechTV
news, personal news clips by the general student body, original programming
like Tech Cribs, Tech Play, and informational slides for upcoming campus
events.

A building program is underway to move from traditional dormitories to
apartment-style complexes. The first of these, University Park, opened in 2004
and houses up to 450 students. The second phase, known as University Park 2
(UP2) opened in 2008. The third phase, Park Place, opened in 2009.

While the university is constructing new apartment-style student housing
complexes, Louisiana Tech is moving to demolish some of the traditional
dormitories. The Kidd Residence Hall on the southern part of the Tech campus
was demolished in 2004. The university also demolished the Caruthers and
Neilson Residence Halls on the north side of the campus. The planned
demolition of Caruthers Hall was postponed in 2005 to allow three hundred
evacuees from Hurricane Katrina to stay in the dorm for three months.

Louisiana Tech has 21 nationally recognized Greek organizations. Each
fraternity and sorority on the Tech campus promotes community services,
philanthropy, and university involvement through each organization's own
locally and/or nationally designated service project. The local Kappa Delta
sorority raised over $10,000 this year from their annual Shamrock 5K & 1 Mile
Run to benefit the Methodist Children's Home of Ruston. Since 2002, the Phi Mu
sorority has held a golf tournament to benefit the Children's Miracle Network.
The Phi Mu Golf Tournament raised $7,000 in 2007 and $10,000 in 2009.[92][93]
Sigma Kappa has held the "Kickin' Grass" kickball tournament to benefit the
Alzheimers Research Foundation since 2009 and raised $2,300 during the 3rd
Annual tournament in 2011.[94]

The Greek organizations also participate in other university activities
including the Big Event, Homecoming Week activities, the Homecoming Step Show,
and Bulldog Football tailgating at Hide-Away Park near Joe Aillet Stadium.[95]
The fraternities and sororities participate in Greek Week each year during the
spring quarter.

Louisiana Tech's Greek fraternities and sororities are governed by three
governing boards. The Interfraternity Council (IFC) governs the ten male
fraternities, Panhellenic governs the five female sororities, and the National
Pan-Hellenic Council (also known as "the Pan") governs the six multicultural
sororities and fraternities.

Louisiana Tech's sixteen varsity athletic teams compete in NCAA Division I
sports as a member of Conference USA. The university's seven men's teams are
known as the Bulldogs, and the nine women's teams are known as the Lady
Techsters. The teams wear the university colors of red and blue except for the
women's basketball team that wears their signature Columbia blue.

Louisiana Tech's football team played its first season in 1901 and has
competed at the NCAA Division I Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) level from
1975 to 1981 and 1989 to present. In its 115 years of existence, Tech's
football program has won three National Championships (1972-National Football
Foundation Co-National Champions, 1973-Division II National Champions,
1974-UPI College Division National Champions), played in 11 major college bowl
games (7â€“3â€“1 overall record), and earned 25 conference titles. Its former
players include 50 All-American players including Terry Bradshaw, Fred Dean,
Willie Roaf, Matt Stover, Ryan Moats, Josh Scobee, Troy Edwards, Tim Rattay,
Luke McCown, Tramon Williams, and Ryan Allen.[99]

The football team competes as a Division I FBS institution in Conference USA.
The Bulldogs are coached by head coach Skip Holtz and play their home games at
Joe Aillet Stadium on the north end of the Tech campus.

The Louisiana Tech Bulldogs men's basketball program started in the 1909â€“10
season under Head Coach Percy S. Prince. The basketball team has won 25
regular season conference titles and 6 conference tournament championships. In
addition, the Dunkin' Dawgs have earned 6 NCAA Tournament and 9 NIT
appearances. The Bulldog program reached the NCAA or the NIT tournaments nine
straight years from 1984 to 1992.[100]

Three Bulldogs have had their numbers retired by Louisiana Tech. These are
Lady Techster Head Coach Leon Barmore (#12), Karl Malone (#32), and collegiate
All-American player Jackie Moreland (#42). Other notable former Bulldog
players include Mike Green, Paul Millsap, Scotty Robertson, P.J. Brown, and
Tim Floyd.

The Bulldogs are led by head coach Eric Konkol and play their home games on
Karl Malone Court at the Thomas Assembly Center.

The Lady Techsters women's basketball program was founded in 1974 with Sonja
Hogg as its first head coach. The Lady Techsters have won three national
championships (1981, 1982, 1988), 20 regular season conference championships,
and 16 conference tournament championships. The program has also appeared in
eight national championship games, 13 Final Fours, and 27 NCAA Women's
Basketball Tournaments including 25 consecutive appearances from 1982 to 2006.

Alumni of the program include WNBA All-Stars Teresa Weatherspoon, Betty
Lennox, and Cheryl Ford in addition to Women's Basketball Hall of Fame coaches
Leon Barmore, Kurt Budke, Mickie DeMoss, Sonja Hogg, and Kim Mulkey. Three
former assistant coaches of the Lady Techsters basketball team have won NCAA
National Women's Basketball Championships as head coaches: Leon Barmore (1988
with Louisiana Tech), Kim Mulkey (2005, 2012, and 2019 with Baylor), and Gary
Blair (2011 with Texas A&M). Also, former Lady Techsters assistant coach Nell
Fortner won the gold medal at the 2000 Sydney Olympics as the head coach for
the United States women's national basketball team.

The team played their home games at Memorial Gym on Louisiana Tech's campus
from 1974 until 1982 when the Thomas Assembly Center was constructed. The team
is coached by former Lady Techster standout Brooke Stoehr and plays its home
games at the Thomas Assembly Center.

The Lady of the Mist is one of the most recognizable landmarks on the
Louisiana Tech Main Campus. The granite sculpture sits in the midst of a
fountain in the middle of the quadrangle (The Quad), one of the focal points
of the university and part of the older section of the Main Campus.[21] The
Lady of the Mist symbolizes "Alma Mater" welcoming new students and bidding
farewell to Tech graduates. The statue also symbolizes the hope that Louisiana
Tech graduates will fulfill their ambitions and highest callings in life.

The statue and fountain was funded in 1938 by the Women's Panhellenic
Association of Ruston, the governing body of the university's sorority groups.
The Lady of the Mist was the idea of Art & Architecture faculty member Mary
Moffett and Art Department Chair Elizabeth Bethea.[101] The Lady of the Mist
was created by Duncan Ferguson and Jules Struppeck and specifically located in
the middle of the Quad facing north toward the old north entrance columns of
the Tech campus. This was done to welcome everyone to the campus as people
looked through the north entrance columns to see the statue's open arms
waiting to greet them.

The Lady fell into disrepair in the years after its construction. In 1985, the
statue was restored through the efforts of the Student Government Association,
Panhellenic, Residence Hall Association, and Association of Women Students.
Today, the statue remains a focal point for students and alumni who return to
the Tech campus. Incoming freshman commemorate their new beginning by tossing
a gold medallion into the fountain.[102]

The alumni walkway was constructed in 1995 as part of the centennial
celebration at Louisiana Tech. The brick path stretches from the corner of
Adams Boulevard and Dan Reneau Drive through the heart of Centennial Plaza to
the footsteps of Tolliver Hall. The alumni brick walkway then follows Wisteria
Street north toward Railroad Avenue. The plan is to extend the alumni brick
walkway through the University Park student housing apartments that were built
near J.C. Love Field.[103] As of May 2011[update], the walkway contained
72,000 engraved bricks representing all Louisiana Tech graduates from 1897 up
to the year 2000.[21]

Louisiana Tech has produced prominent businesspeople across several
industries. Louisiana Tech alumnus Nick Akins is currently serving as chief
executive officer of Fortune 500 company American Electric Power. Alumnus Glen
Post is the former CEO of CenturyLink, and alumnus Michael McCallister is the
former CEO of Humana. Edward L. Moyers, former president and CEO of several
railroads including MidSouth Rail, Illinois Central Railroad and Southern
Pacific Railroad, is a Louisiana Tech graduate. Billionaire businessmen
brothers Charles Wyly and Sam Wyly graduated from Louisiana Tech. Founder of
Duck Commander and star of A&E's reality television series _Duck Dynasty_ Phil
Robertson earned two degrees from Louisiana Tech. Will Wright, designer of
some of the best-selling video games of all-time ( _SimCity_ , _The Sims_ ,
and _Spore_ ) and co-founder of game development company Maxis, attended
Louisiana Tech.

Alumni of Louisiana Tech have also made their mark in the arts, entertainment,
and the humanities. Country music superstars Kix Brooks and Trace Adkins are
Louisiana Tech alumni along with two-time Grammy Award nominee Wayne Watson.
Eddie Gossling, writer and producer for Comedy Central's _Tosh.0_ , attended
Louisiana Tech. Alumna Faith Jenkins, winner of the most scholarship money in
Miss America pageant history, was the host of the _Judge Faith_ television
show, and alumna Sharon Brown is a former Miss USA. Louisiana Tech graduate
Marc Swayze is known for creating comic book superheroine Mary Marvel and his
work on Captain Marvel.

Louisiana Tech graduates have been influential through public service and
activism. Former United States Senators James P. Pope and Saxby Chambliss and
United States Representatives Newt V. Mills, Joe Waggonner, Jim McCrery, and
Rodney Alexander all attended Louisiana Tech. In addition, James P. Pope
served as director of the Tennessee Valley Authority. Louisiana Tech alumnus
Clint Williamson served as United States Ambassador-at-Large for War Crimes
Issues. Many notable military leaders are Louisiana Tech alumni including
lieutenant general David Wade, lieutenant general John Spencer Hardy, major
general Susan Y. Desjardins, and major general Jack Ramsaur II. Alumna Kim
Gandy served as president of the National Organization for Women, and alumnus
Jerome Ringo served as chairman of the National Wildlife Federation.

Louisiana Tech athletes have starred in the National Football League, National
Basketball Association, and Women's National Basketball Association as well as
other professional sports. Three Bulldogs have been inducted into the Pro
Football Hall of Fame and College Football Hall of Fame: Four-time Super Bowl
champion quarterback Terry Bradshaw, four-time Pro Bowl defensive end Fred
Dean, and eleven-time Pro Bowl offensive tackle Willie Roaf. Other notable
former Bulldog football players include Leo Sanford, Roger Carr, Pat Tilley,
Matt Stover, Troy Edwards, Tim Rattay, Tramon Williams, and Ryan Allen.
Legendary Lady Techsters coach Leon Barmore, two-time NBA Most Valuable Player
Karl Malone, and Wade Trophy winner Teresa Weatherspoon are Louisiana Tech's
three inductees into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame. Other
notable former Bulldog basketball players include former NBA head coaches
Scotty Robertson and Tim Floyd, ABA All-Star Mike Green, NBA champion P. J.
Brown, and four-time NBA All-Star Paul Millsap. The Women's Basketball Hall of
Fame has inducted seven Louisiana Tech alumni including Leon Barmore, Janice
Lawrence Braxton, Mickie DeMoss, Sonja Hogg, Pam Kelly, Kim Mulkey, and Teresa
Weatherspoon. Other notable former Lady Techsters include Olympic gold
medalist Venus Lacy, two-time WNBA All-Star Vickie Johnson, WNBA Finals Most
Valuable Player Betty Lennox, and WNBA Rookie of the Year Cheryl Ford.

