The **Louisville metropolitan area** or **Kentuckiana** , also known as the
Louisville–Jefferson County, Kentucky–Indiana, metropolitan statistical area,
is the 45th largest[b] metropolitan statistical area (MSA) in the United
States. The principal city is Louisville, Kentucky.

It was originally formed by the United States Census Bureau in 1950 and
consisted of the Kentucky county of Jefferson and the Indiana counties of
Clark and Floyd. As surrounding counties saw an increase in their population
densities and the number of their residents employed within Jefferson County,
they met Census criteria to be added to the MSA. Jefferson County, Kentucky
(contiguous with Louisville Metro), plus twelve outlying counties – seven in
Kentucky and five in Southern Indiana – are now a part of this MSA. One other
Kentucky county was part of the MSA in the 2000 and 2010 U.S. Censuses, but
was spun off by the Census Bureau into its own Micropolitan Statistical Area
in 2013.

People living in any of the MSA are said to be living in the
Louisville–Jefferson County Area. Because it includes counties in Indiana, the
MSA (or a large portion thereof) is regularly referred to as **Kentuckiana**.
It is now the primary MSA of the **Louisville–Jefferson
County–Elizabethtown–Madison, Kentucky–Indiana combined statistical area** (or
Louisville CSA, which adds Hardin County, Kentucky, LaRue County, Kentucky,
Jefferson County, Indiana, and Nelson County, Kentucky). The combined
statistical area created by the United States Bureau of the Census in 2000 and
most recently redefined in 2013 comprises the Louisville–Jefferson County MSA,
the Elizabethtown–Fort Knox, Kentucky, MSA, the Bardstown, Kentucky,
micropolitan statistical area and the Madison, Indiana micropolitan
statistical area.

As of 2013[update] the U.S. Office of Management and Budget defines the
Louisville–Jefferson County MSA as including Bullitt, Henry, Jefferson, Meade,
Oldham, Shelby, and Trimble Counties in Kentucky and Clark, Floyd, Harrison,
Scott, and Washington Counties in Indiana. The larger Louisville–Jefferson
County–Elizabethtown–Madison CSA adds two other statistical areas in Kentucky
and one in Indiana:

**Louisville–Jefferson County MSA**

**Elizabethtown–Fort Knox, Kentucky, MSA**

**Bardstown, Kentucky, µSA**

**Madison, Indiana, µSA**

**Principal city**

In 2003, the Jefferson government merged with that of its largest city and
county seat, Louisville, forming a new entity, the Louisville–Jefferson County
Metro Government (official long form) or Louisville Metro (official short
form). All small cities within Jefferson became part of the new Louisville
Metro government while retaining their city governments. For statistical and
ranking purposes, the United States Census Bureau uses the statistical entity
Louisville–Jefferson County metro government (balance), Kentucky, to represent
the portion of the consolidated city-county of Louisville–Jefferson County
that does not include any of the 83 separate incorporated places
(municipalities) located within the city and county.

Louisville Metro (771,158)  
Louisville–Jefferson County (balance) (621,349)

**Municipalities with more than 25,000 people**

**Municipalities with 10,000 to 25,000 people**

**Municipalities with less than 10,000 people**

*Part of Louisville Metro  
‡Prospect lies in both Jefferson and Oldham Counties. The portion within
Jefferson County is part of Louisville Metro.

**Notes**

**Notes**

Coordinates: 38°13′44″N 85°44′58″W﻿ / ﻿38.22889°N 85.74944°W﻿ / 38.22889;
-85.74944

