**Lynn Fontanne** (/fɒnˈtæn/;[1] 6 December 1887 – 30 July 1983) was a
British-born American-based actress for over 40 years. She teamed with her
husband, Alfred Lunt. Lunt and Fontanne were given special Tony Awards in
1970. They both won Emmy Awards in 1965, and Broadway's Lunt-Fontanne Theatre
was named for them. Fontanne is regarded as one of the American theater's
great leading ladies of the 20th century.[2]

Born Lillie Louise Fontanne in Woodford, London, of French and Irish descent,
her parents were Jules Fontanne and Frances Ellen Thornley. She had two
sisters, one of whom later lived in England; the other lived in New
Zealand.[3]

She drew acclaim in 1921 playing the title role in the George S. Kaufman-Marc
Connelly farce, _Dulcy_. Dorothy Parker memorialized her performance in verse:

_Dulcy_ , take our gratitude,  
All your words are gold ones.  
Mistress of the platitude,  
Queen of all the old ones.  
You, at last, are something new  
'Neath the theatre's dome. I'd  
Mention to the cosmos, you  
Swing a wicked bromide. ...[4]

She soon became celebrated for her skill as an actress in high comedy,
excelling in witty roles written for her by Noël Coward, S.N. Behrman, and
Robert Sherwood. However, she enjoyed one of the greatest critical successes
of her career as Nina Leeds, the desperate heroine of Eugene O'Neill's
controversial nine-act drama _Strange Interlude_. From the late 1920s on,
Fontanne acted exclusively in vehicles also starring her husband. Among their
greatest theater triumphs were _Design for Living_ (1933), _The Taming of the
Shrew_ (1935–36), _Idiot's Delight_ (1936), _There Shall Be No Night_ (1940),
and _Quadrille_ (1952). _Design for Living_ , which Coward wrote expressly for
himself and the Lunts, was so risqué, with its theme of bisexuality and a
ménage à trois, that Coward premiered it in New York, knowing it would not
survive the censor in London. The duo remained active onstage until retiring
from stage performances in 1958.[5] Fontanne was nominated for a Tony Award
for one of her last stage roles, in _The Visit_ (1959).[6]

Fontanne and Lunt worked together in 27 productions.[7] Of her acting style
with Lunt, British broadcasting personality Arthur Marshall \- having seen her
in _Caprice_ St James's Theatre (1929) - observed: "In the plays of the
period, actors waited to speak until somebody else had finished; the Lunts
turned all that upside down. They threw away lines, they trod on each others
words, they gabbled, they spoke at the same time. They spoke, in fact, as
people do in ordinary life."[8]

Fontanne made only four films but nevertheless was nominated for the Academy
Award for Best Actress in 1931 for _The Guardsman_ , losing to Helen Hayes.
She also appeared in the silent films _Second Youth_ (1924) and _The Man Who
Found Himself_ (1925). She and husband Alfred also were in _Hollywood Canteen_
(1944) in which they had cameos as themselves. The Lunts starred in four
television productions in the 1950s and 1960s with both Lunt and Fontanne
winning Emmy Awards in 1965 for _The Magnificent Yankee_ ,[7] becoming the
first married couple to win the award for playing a married couple.[ _citation
needed_ ] Fontanne narrated the 1960 television production of _Peter Pan_
starring Mary Martin and received a second Emmy nomination for playing Grand
Duchess Marie in the Hallmark Hall of Fame telecast of _Anastasia_ in 1967,
two of the few productions in which she appeared without her husband. The
Lunts also starred in several radio dramas in the 1940s, notably on the
Theatre Guild programme. Many of these broadcasts still survive.[9]

On 5 May 1958, the former Globe Theatre, at Broadway and 46th Street,
originally opened in 1910 and later turned into a motion picture venue after
the Stock Market Crash of 1929, was reopened after a massive gut renovation
and renamed the Lunt-Fontanne Theatre. On that day the Lunts opened their new
house with, _The Visit_ , by Dürrenmatt. After 189 performances, _The Visit_
would be their last appearance on Broadway.[10]

Twenty years later, on 5 May 1978, Lynn Fontanne, aged ninety, was honored at
the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, during a revival performance of Hello, Dolly!, by
its star Carol Channing.[11] A reminiscence of that evening, "An Evening with
Lynn Fontanne", was published on-line by Martha Rofheart, a former protégée of
Fontanne.[12][13]

In 1964, Lunt and Fontanne were presented with the Presidential Medal of
Freedom by then-President Lyndon Johnson.[7]

Like Lunt, Fontanne was a member of the American Theatre Hall of Fame.[14]
Fontanne was also a Kennedy Center honoree in 1980.

Some of her costumes are curated in the Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Mount Mary
University (formerly known as Mount Mary College) Historic Costume
Collection.[15]

Fontanne married Alfred Lunt in 1922. The union was childless.[16] The couple
lived for many years at "Ten Chimneys" in Genesee Depot, Wisconsin. They were
married for 55 years and were inseparable both on and off the stage.

Fontanne went to great lengths to avoid divulging her true age. Her husband
reportedly died believing she was five years younger than he (as she had told
him).[17] She was, in fact, five years older, but continued to deny, long
after Lunt's death, that she was born in 1887.[17]

Asked once how to pronounce her surname, she told the _Literary Digest_ she
preferred the French way, but "If the French is too difficult for American
consumption, both syllables should be equally accented, and the _a_ should be
more or less broad": _fon-tahn_.[18]

Lynn Fontanne died in 1983, aged 95, from pneumonia, at "Ten Chimneys" in
Genesee Depot and was interred next to her husband at Forest Home Cemetery in
Milwaukee, Wisconsin.[7]

Lunt and Fontanne made multiple performances on the 1940s and '50s radio
anthology series Theater Guild on the Air (also known as "United States Steel
Hour"). These programmes were hour-long adaptations of famous plays. The
couple performed together eight times on the programme, and each appeared
three times without the other. Recordings of most of these episodes still
exist unless noted.[ _citation needed_ ]

