**Elzie Lee "LZ" Granderson** (born March 11, 1972)[3] is an American
journalist and former actor. He is currently a senior writer and columnist for
_ESPN The Magazine_ , a co-host of _SportsNation on ESPN_ , co-host of
_Mornings With Keyshawn, LZ and Travis_ on ESPN LA 710, and a columnist for
CNN.[4] Granderson was named the _Los Angeles Times_ Sports and Culture
Columnist in January 2019.[5]

Granderson is a former writer for ESPN.com's Page 2 and he has contributed to
the channel's _SportsCenter_ , _Outside the Lines_ , _Around the Horn_ , and
ESPN's _First Take_ and commentates for ESPN's coverage of the US Open tennis
tournament.[6] He has also hosted the web-based ESPN360 talk show _Game
Night_. Granderson has appeared as a color commentator for CBS Sports during
their coverage of World TeamTennis.[7]

Granderson is a former fellow of the Institute of Politics at the University
of Chicago and the Hechinger Institute at Columbia University, as well as a
columnist for ABC News.[8]

Granderson was born and raised in Detroit, where he developed a passion for
ice hockey and the National Hockey League. He graduated from Western Michigan
University in Kalamazoo, Michigan.

Granderson acted in the 1992 movie _Zebrahead_ , which was set in his hometown
of Detroit, playing the supporting role of Larry. He also played the
supporting role of Arch Carrouthers in the 1996 Sidney Poitier TV movie _To
Sir, with Love II_.[9]

Before he moved to ESPN and Page 2, he was a sportswriter at _The Atlanta
Journal-Constitution_ and a columnist at _The Grand Rapids Press_.[10][11][12]

Granderson's writings for Page 2 usually center on the social and human
aspects of sports. He writes about his own personal struggles, the life of
athletes, and occasionally provides social commentary. In June 2015, he joined
ABC News as a contributor in a variety of programming across the ABC News
platform.[13]

On April 18, 2012, Granderson wrote an opinion article titled "Ted Nugent
should be in jail" for the online CNN website, accusing rock musician Ted
Nugent of threatening the life of President of the United States Barack Obama,
based on comments from a speech Nugent gave.[14] On June 27, 2012, Granderson
published a controversial[15][16][17] opinion article titled "Don't be nosy
about Fast and Furious" for CNN's website, accusing the American public of
being too nosy about the way their government functions, saluting disgraced
Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North for "taking one for the team" in his role in
the Iranâ€“Contra affair, and suggesting that illegal acts by government
officials taken in the name of protecting the public should be hidden from
public and legal scrutiny.[18]

In 2013, he defended NBA center Jason Collins' decision to announce himself as
the first openly gay male professional athlete in a major North American
sport.[19]

On January 28, 2016, Granderson made his debut on the ESPN program _Around the
Horn_ , losing in the "Showdown" portion of the episode to Jackie
MacMullan.[20]

In January 2019, Granderson was named the _Los Angeles Times'_ Sports and
Culture Columnist.[21] This role was created for him and will exemplify the
"sectionality of sports and society [and] politics and culture."[22]

Granderson was the 2009 winner of the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against
Defamation award for online journalism, and was nominated for the award again
in 2010. He is also a 2008 and 2010 honoree of the National Lesbian and Gay
Journalists Association for column writing, and a member of the Advisory Board
for You Can Play, a campaign dedicated to fighting homophobia in sports.[23]

In a 2012 column for CNN.com, Granderson openly stated that he was gay.[24]
Granderson has one son, Isaiah, from his previous marriage to a woman.[25]
Granderson's partner Steve Huesing is Ulta Beauty's merchandising operations
director and interim president of Chicago's Marriage Equality USA.[26]

