**Macanese Patois** (known as _**Patuá**_ to its speakers) is a Portuguese-
based creole language with a substrate from Cantonese, Malay and Sinhalese,
which was originally spoken by the Macanese community of the Portuguese colony
of Macau. It is now spoken by a few families in Macau and in the Macanese
diaspora.

On 20 February 2009, the new edition of UNESCO’s Atlas of the World's
Languages in Danger classified Patua as a "critically endangered" language.
The Atlas puts the number of Patua speakers at 50 as of the year 2000. It
underwent decreolisation and a shift to Standard Portuguese while Macau was
still under Portuguese administration.

The language is also called by its speakers _**Papia Cristam di Macau**_
("Christian speech of Macau") and has been nicknamed _Dóci Língu di Macau_
("Sweet Language of Macau") and _Doci Papiaçam_ ("sweet speech") by poets. In
Portuguese it is called _**Macaense**_ , _**Macaista Chapado**_ ("pure
Macanese") or _**Patuá**_ (from French _patois_ ).

Patuá arose in Macau[ _citation needed_ ] after the territory was occupied by
Portugal in the mid-16th century and became a major hub of the Portuguese
naval, commercial, and religious activities in East Asia.

The language developed first mainly among the descendants of Portuguese
settlers. These often married women from Portuguese Malacca, Portuguese India
and Portuguese Ceylon rather than from neighbouring China, so the language had
strong Malay and Sinhalese influence from the beginning. In the 17th century
it was further influenced by the influx of immigrants from other Portuguese
colonies in Asia, especially from Portuguese Malacca, Indonesia, and
Portuguese Ceylon, that had been displaced by the Dutch expansion in the East
Indies, and Japanese Christian refugees.

Like any other language, Macanese underwent extensive changes in usage,
grammar, syntax, and vocabulary over the centuries, in response to changes in
Macau's demographics and cultural contacts. Some linguists see a sharp
distinction between the "archaic" Macanese, spoken until the early 19th
century, and the "modern" form that was strongly influenced by Cantonese. The
modern version arose in the late 19th century, when Macanese men began
marrying Chinese women from Macau and its hinterland in the Pearl River delta.
The British occupation of Hong Kong from the mid-19th century also added many
English words to the lexicon.

Over its history the language also acquired elements from several other Indian
tongues and a string of other European and Asian languages. These varied
influences made Macanese a unique "cocktail" of European and Asian languages.

Miguel Senna Fernandes, a lawyer by profession and Patuá supporter by passion,
has said that Patuá was "not yet dead, but the archaic form of Patuá has
already died," adding that "modern" Patuá could be considered a "dialect
derived from archaic Patuá." He also underlined the fact that "modern" Patuá
has been strongly influenced by Cantonese, namely since the beginning of the
20th century, adding that it was "quite a miracle" that Patuá has been able to
survive for four centuries in Macau, considering that "Chinese culture is
quite absorbing."

"Let's revive an almost lost memory," Fernandes said about efforts by Patuá
aficionados to ensure the survival of Macau's "sweet language" that, after
all, is part of its unique history.

The language played an important role in Macau's social and commercial
development between the 16th and 19th centuries, when it was the main language
of communication among Macau's Eurasian residents. However, even during that
period the total number of speakers was relatively small, probably always
amounting to just thousands, not tens of thousands of people.

Macanese continued to be spoken as the mother tongue of several thousand of
people, in Macau, Hong Kong and elsewhere, through 19th and early 20th
century. At that time, Macanese speakers were consciously using the language
in opposition to the standard Portuguese of the metropolitan administration.
In the early 20th century, for example, it was the vehicle of satirical
sketches poking fun at Portuguese authorities. A few writers, such as the late
poet José dos Santos Ferreira ("Adé"), chose the "sweet language" as their
creative medium.

On the other hand, Macanese never enjoyed any official status, and was never
formally taught in Macau. Starting in the late 19th century, its role in the
life of the colony was greatly diminished by the central government's drive to
establish standard Portuguese throughout its territories. High-society
Macanese gradually stopped using it in the early 20th century, because of its
perceived "low class" status as a "primitive Portuguese". All people,
including many Chinese learning Portuguese as their second or third language,
are required to learn standard European Portuguese dialect.

Macanese use was already in decline while Macau was a Portuguese territory,
and that situation is unlikely to improve now that the territory is under
Chinese administration. Still, its speakers take great pride in the fact that
Macau has its own local language, something that Hong Kong does not have. They
argue that Macau's unique status as a 500-year-old bridge between Orient and
the Occident justifies deliberate efforts to preserve the Macanese language,
and its inclusion in UNESCO's Red Book of Endangered Languages.

In spite of its unique character and centuries-old history, Macanese has
received scant attention from linguists. Philologist Graciete Nogueira Batalha
(1925–1992) published a number of papers on the language. A Macanese-
Portuguese glossary was published in 2001.

Macanese is the now nearly extinct native language of the so-called Macanese
people, Macau's Eurasian minority, which presently comprises some 8,000
residents in Macau (about 2% of its population), and an estimated 20,000
emigrants and their descendants, especially in Hong Kong, Brazil, California,
Canada, Peru, Costa Rica, Australia, Portugal and Paria peninsula of
Venezuela. Even within that community, Macanese is actively spoken by just
several dozen elderly individuals, mostly women in their eighties or nineties,
in Macau and Hong Kong, and only a few hundred people among the Macanese
Diaspora overseas, namely in California.

Macanese is a creole language, that is, the result of a fusion of several
languages and local innovations that became the mother tongue of a community.
As such, it is difficult to classify within any major family.

Because of its historical development, it is closely related to other
Portuguese- and Malay-influenced creoles of Southeast Asia, notably the
Kristang language of Malacca and the extinct Portuguese-influenced creoles of
Indonesia and Flores, as well as to the Indo-Portuguese creoles of Sri Lanka
and India.

Most of the Macanese lexicon derives from Malay, through various Portuguese-
influenced creoles ( _papiás_ ) like the Kristang of Malacca and the creole
spoken in the Indonesian island of Flores. Words of Malay origin include
_sapeca_ ("coin") and _copo-copo_ ("butterfly").

Many words also came from Sinhalese, through the Indo-Portuguese creoles of
the Kaffir and Portuguese Burgher communities of Sri Lanka. Some terms derived
from other Indian languages through other Indo-Portuguese creoles brought by
natives of Portuguese India, these include Konkani and Marathi languages.
Examples of words from these sources include _fula_ ("flower") and _lacassa_
("vermicelli").

Cantonese contributions include _amui_ ("girl") and _laissi_ ("gift of cash").
English-derived terms include _adap_ (from "hard-up", meaning "short of
money") and _afet_ ("fat").

The Portuguese contribution to the lexicon came mainly from the dialects of
southern Portugal.

There has been little scientific research of Macanese grammar, much less on
its development between the 16th and 20th centuries. Its grammatical structure
seems to incorporate both European and Asian elements.

Like most Asian languages, Macanese lacks definite articles, and does not
inflect verbs: for example, _io sam_ means "I am," and _ele sam_ means "he/she
is." Macanese also lacks pronoun cases ( _io_ means "I," "me" and "mine"), and
has a peculiar way of forming possessive adjectives ( _ilotro-sua_ means
"theirs").

Progressive action (denoted in English by the "-ing" verbal forms) is denoted
by a separate particle _ta_ , presumably derived from Portuguese _está_ ("it
is"). Completed actions are likewise indicated by the particle _ja_ ,
presumably from Portuguese _já_ ("right now" or "already").

Reduplication is used to make plural nouns ( _casa-casa_ = "houses"), plural
adjectives ( _china-china_ = "several Chinese people or things"), and emphatic
adverbs ( _cedo-cedo_ = "very early"), a pattern also found in Malay grammar.

Patuá has no standardised orthography.

Here is an example of a Patuá poem:

Note that "nhonha" is cognate with "nyonya" in Malay/Kristang, both being
derived from Portuguese _donha_ (lady).

_N.B. A major part of the above article is based on a feature story by Harald
Bruning that was published in the Chinese edition of Macau Magazine, produced
by Sinofare Co. Ltd for the Macau Government Information Bureau (GCS), in June
2004._

