**Lancaster's _chevauchée_ of 1346** was a large-scale mounted raid directed
by Henry, Earl of Lancaster, in south western France during the Hundred Years'
War. The main English army had defeated the larger French army at the Battle
of Crécy in August, and French defences in the south west were left weak and
disorganised. Lancaster took advantage by leading a raid between 12 September
and 31 October 1346 while sending other forces into Quercy and the Bazadais.
All three offensives were successful, with Lancaster's _chevauchée_ , of
approximately 2,000 English and Gascon soldiers, meeting no effective
resistance from the French, penetrating 160 miles (260 kilometres) north and
storming the rich city of Poitiers. His force then razed and looted large
areas of Saintonge, Aunis and Poitou, capturing numerous towns, castles and
smaller fortified places as they went. The offensives completely disrupted the
French defences and shifted the focus of the fighting. ( **Full article...**)

**September 12**

**Grace Macurdy** (b. 1866) **·** **George Reid** (d. 1918) **·** **Raymond
Burr** (d. 1993)

**Mae Jemison** (born 1956) is an American engineer, physician and former NASA
astronaut. She became the first black woman to travel in space when she served
as a mission specialist aboard the Space Shuttle _Endeavour_. Jemison joined
NASA's astronaut corps in 1987 and was selected to serve for the STS-47
mission, during which she orbited the Earth for nearly eight days on September
12–20, 1992.

Born in Alabama and raised in Chicago, Jemison graduated from Stanford
University with degrees in chemical engineering as well as African and
African-American studies. She then earned her medical degree from Cornell
University. Jemison was a doctor for the Peace Corps in Liberia and Sierra
Leone from 1983 until 1985 and worked as a general practitioner. In pursuit of
becoming an astronaut, she applied to NASA. Jemison left NASA in 1993 and
founded a technology research company. She later formed a non-profit
educational foundation and through the foundation is the principal of the 100
Year Starship project funded by DARPA. Jemison has also written several books
for children and appeared on television several times, including in an episode
of _Star Trek: The Next Generation_. She holds several honorary doctorates and
has been inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame and the International
Space Hall of Fame.

This picture is Jemison's official NASA portrait, taken in 1992, prior to her
STS-47 spaceflight; she is depicted in her Launch Entry Suit.

Photograph credit: NASA

Wikipedia is hosted by the Wikimedia Foundation, a non-profit organization
that also hosts a range of other projects:

This Wikipedia is written in English. Started in 2001 (2001), it currently
contains 5,928,256 articles. Many other Wikipedias are available; some of the
largest are listed below.

