In addition to its classical and literary form, Malay had various regional
dialects established before the rise of the Malaccan Sultanate. Also, Malay
spread through interethnic contact and trade across the Malay archipelago as
far as the Philippines. That contact resulted in a lingua franca that was
called _Bazaar Malay_ or _low Malay_ and in Malay _Melayu Pasar_. It is
generally believed that Bazaar Malay was a pidgin, influenced by contact among
Malay, Chinese, Portuguese, and Dutch traders.

Besides the general simplification that occurs with pidgins, the Malay lingua
franca had several distinctive characteristics. One was that possessives were
formed with _punya_ 'its owner'; another was that plural pronouns were formed
with _orang_ 'person'. The only Malayic affixes that remained productive were
_tər-_ and _bər-_.

Other features:

For example,[2]

Bazaar Malay is used in a limited extent in Singapore and Malaysia, mostly
among the older generation or people with no working knowledge of English.[3]
The most important reason that contributed to the decline of Bazaar Malay is
that pidgin Malay has creolised and created several new languages.[4] Another
reason is due to language shift in both formal and informal contexts, Bazaar
Malay is gradually being replaced by English, with English being the lingua
franca among the younger generations.[3]

**Baba Malay** or **Peranakan Malay** , once a diverse group of pidgins, is
spoken in Melaka but is now almost extinct. These are Malay varieties spoken
by the Peranakan, descendants of Chinese settlers who have lived in Melaka
since the 15th Century.[9] Baba Malay is close to the trade pidgins which
became creolised across the Malay Archipelago, producing the variety of Malay
creoles seen today. A kind of Baba Malay, called **Peranakan** , is spoken
among Chinese living in East Java. It is a mixture of Malay or Indonesian with
local Javanese (East Javanese dialect) and Chinese elements (particularly
Hokkien). This particular variety is found only in East Java, especially in
Surabaya and surrounding areas. While other Chinese tend to speak the language
varieties of the places in which they live (the Chinese of Central Java speak
High or Standard Javanese in daily conversation even among themselves; in West
Java, they tend to speak Sundanese), in Surabaya younger ethnic Chinese people
tend to speak pure Javanese (Surabaya dialect) and learn Mandarin in courses.

There are currently fewer 1,000 Baba Malay speakers in Melaka, and fewer than
1,000 Baba Malay speakers in Singapore.[10] Baba Malay is mostly spoken among
the older populations. _[11]_

Example (Spoken in Surabaya):

Example (Spoken in Melaka-Singapore):[12]

Betawi Malay, also known as Jakarta or Java Malay, is a creolised-Malay which
is spoken in Jakarta (the modern name for Betawi) and its surroundings.
Betawian or _Omong Betawi_ is based on Bazaar Malay (Melayu Pasar) but
influenced by various languages such as Javanese, Sundanese (the area is
surrounded by Sundanese speaking area), Chinese (especially Hokkien),
Portuguese, Dutch, Balinese and others. Betawian creole began to be used after
1750 in Batavia, and replaced Portuguese creole as the _lingua franca_.[13]

Betawian Malay was also influenced by Chinese-style Malay spoken by the
Chinese settlers who had come earlier.

It has now become a very popular language particularly amongst the younger
generations in Indonesia due largely to its use on television (such as
_sinetron_ or _sitcom_ ).

Betawi Malay was the ancestor of Cocos Malay.

Spoken since the 16th century by descendants of Tamil merchants of the Malacca
Straits. It may be historically related to Sri Lanka Creole Malay. The current
language status is moribund, due to inter-marriage and out-migration. There
has been language shift towards Malay instead.[15]

The Sri Lankan Creole Malay language is a unique mixture of the Sinhalese
language and the Tamil language with Malay. Sri Lanka Malay (SLM) is a
restructured vernacular of Malay base spoken by at least five different
communities in Sri Lanka which has evolved to be significantly divergent from
other varieties of Malay due to intimate contact with the dominant languages
of Sinhala and Tamil. The Malays in Sri Lanka, whose ancestry include
labourers brought by the Dutch and British, as well as soldiers in the Dutch
garrison, now constitute 0.3% of the population, numbering some 46,000. It is
spoken exclusively by the Malay ethnic minority in Sri Lanka.[16]

Singapore Bazaar Malay, also known as Bazaar Malay, Pasar Malay, or Market
Malay, is a Malay-lexified pidgin, which is spoken in Singapore. [17] Tamil
and Hokkien contributed to the development of Bazaar Malay, with Hokkien being
the dominant substrate language of Bazaar Malay, with Malay being the lexifier
language. [18] However, there are many input languages spoken by immigrants
that also contributed to the development of Bazaar Malay, including languages
spoken by Malays, Chinese, Indians, Eurasians, and Europeans. Singapore Bazaar
Malay emerged along with the opening of Singapore's free trade port in 1819,
to overcome barriers in communication and business transactions. Since
Singapore have four official languages (English, Mandarin, Malay, and Tamil),
Singapore Bazaar Malay not only is a lingua franca in interethnic
communication, it is also used in intra-group communication. Singapore Bazaar
Malay is mostly spoken by elders and middle-aged workers today, but its
language status is declining due to education policies and language campaigns
with less than 10,000 speakers. [17]

A pidgin used in the pearl industry in West Australia.

A pidginised variant of standard Malay, Sabah Malay is a local trade
language.[22] There are a large number of native speakers in urban areas,
mainly children who have a second native language. There are also some
speakers in the southernmost parts of the Philippines, particularly in the
Sulu Archipelago as a trade language.

Makassar Malay is a creole-based mixed language, which is build of Bazaar
Malay lexicon, Makassarese inflections, and mixed Malay/Makassarese
syntax.[25][26]

It is widely spoken as a second language in Makassar,[27] but increasingly
also as a first language in the younger generation.[26]

Balinese Malay is a dialect of Malay spoken in the island of Bali. It is also
known as _Omong Kampung_ ("village speak") by its speakers. Balinese Malay is
the primary language of ethnic Malay who live in the northwestern part of the
island, mainly in the districts of Melaya and Negara, Jembrana Regency.[29]
The current language status is threatened. [30]

The creoles of eastern Indonesia[31] appear to have formed as Malays and
Javanese, using lingua franca Malay, established their monopoly on the spice
trade before the European colonial era. They have a number of features in
common:

For example,[2]

Bacan (next) is perhaps the most archaic, and appears to be closely related to
Brunei Malay (which is not a creole).

Bacanese Malay is a Malayic isolect spoken in Bacan Island and its
surroundings, south of Halmahera, North Maluku. Bacanese Malay is considered
rather different than other Malay-derived languages in eastern Indonesia by
its archaic lexicon and was used as a supplementary language in the
reconstruction of Proto-Malayic.[33]

Manado Malay is another creole which is the lingua franca in Manado and
Minahasa, North Sulawesi. It is based on Ternatean Malay and highly influenced
by Ternatean, Dutch, Minahasa languages and some Portuguese words.

Examples :

Sentences :

Gorap is lexically 85% Malay, but has many Ternate words as well, and word
order differs from both Austronesian and Halmahera languages. Children no
longer acquire the language.

This creole resembles Manado Malay, but differs in accent and vocabulary. A
large percentage of its vocabulary is borrowed from Ternatean, such as: ngana
: you (sg) ngoni : you (pl) bifi : ant ciri : to fall Spoken in Ternate,
Tidore and Halmahera islands, North Maluku for intergroup communications, and
in the Sula Islands.

Example :

Spoken in Kupang, East Nusa Tenggara, on the west end of Timor Island. It is
based on archaic Malay which mixed mostly with Dutch, Portuguese and local
languages. Similar to Ambonese Malay with several differences in vocabulary
and accent. Its grammatical system resembles that of other East Indonesian
Malay Creoles.

Examples :

Alor Malay is spoken in the Alor archipelago. Speakers perceive Alor Malay to
be a different register of standard Indonesian, but both of these are prestige
varieties of the archipelago. Many people are able to understand standard
Indonesian, but cannot speak it fluently and choose to use Alor Malay on a
daily basis.[36]

Alor Malay is based on Kupang Malay; however, Alor Malay differs significantly
from Kupang Malay, especially in its pronouns.[37]

Malay was first brought to Ambon by traders from Western Indonesia, then
developed into a creole when the Dutch Empire colonised the Moluccas. Ambonese
Malay was the first example of the transliteration of Malay into Roman script,
and used as a tool of the missionaries in Eastern Indonesia.

A distinct variant of Moluccan Malay, spoken in Banda Islands, Maluku.
Significantly different from Ambonese Malay and for Ambonese, Bandanese Malay
tends to be perceived as sounding funny due to its unique features.

Example :

Papuan Malay is the main contact language of the Indonesian half of New
Guinea.

