**Marcello Vincenzo Domenico Mastroianni** (Italian pronunciation: [marˈtʃɛllo
mastroˈjanni]; 28 September 1924 – 19 December 1996) was an Italian film
actor. His prominent films include: _La Dolce Vita_ ; _8½_ ; _La Notte_ ;
_Divorce Italian Style_ ; _Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow_ ; _Marriage Italian
Style_ ; _The 10th Victim_ ; _A Special Day_ ; _City of Women_ ; _Henry IV_ ;
_Dark Eyes_ ; and _Everybody's Fine_. His honours included British Film
Academy Awards, Best Actor awards at the Cannes Film Festival and two Golden
Globe Awards.

Mastroianni was born in Fontana Liri, a small village in the Apennines in the
province of Frosinone, Lazio, and grew up in Turin and Rome. He was the son of
Ida (née Irolle) and Ottone Mastroianni, who ran a carpentry shop,[1] and the
nephew of sculptor Umberto Mastroianni. During World War II, after the
division into Axis and Allied Italy, he was interned in a loosely guarded
German prison camp, from which he escaped to hide in Venice.

His brother Ruggero Mastroianni was a film editor who edited a number of his
brother's films, and appeared alongside Marcello in _Scipione detto anche
l'Africano_ , a spoof of the once popular sword and sandal (peplum) film genre
released in 1971.

Mastroianni made his screen debut as an uncredited extra in _Marionette_
(1939) when he was fourteen, and made intermittent minor film appearances
until landing his first big role in _Atto d'accusa_ (1951). Within a decade he
became a major international celebrity, starring in _Big Deal on Madonna
Street_ (1958); and in Federico Fellini's _La Dolce Vita_ opposite Anita
Ekberg in 1960, where he played a disillusioned and self-loathing tabloid
columnist who spends his days and nights exploring Rome's high society.
Mastroianni followed _La Dolce Vita_ with another signature role, that of a
film director who, amidst self-doubt and troubled love affairs, finds himself
in a creative block while making a movie in Fellini's _8½_ (1963).

His other prominent films include _Days of Love_ (1954) with Marina Vlady; _La
Notte_ (1961) with Jeanne Moreau; _Too Bad She's Bad_ (1954), _Lucky to Be a
Woman_ (1956), _Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow_ (1963), _Marriage Italian-
Style_ (1964), _Sunflower_ (1970), _The Priest's Wife_ (1971), _A Special Day_
(1977) and Robert Altman's _Ready to Wear_ (1994) – all co-starring Sophia
Loren; Luchino Visconti's _White Nights_ (1957); Pietro Germi's _Divorce,
Italian Style_ (1961); _Family Diary_ (1962) with Jacques Perrin; _A Very
Private Affair_ (1962) with Brigitte Bardot; Mario Monicelli's _Casanova 70_
(1965); _Diamonds for Breakfast_ (1968) with Rita Tushingham; _The Pizza
Triangle_ (1970) with Monica Vitti; _Massacre in Rome_ (1973) with Richard
Burton; _The Sunday Woman_ (1975) with Jacqueline Bisset; _Stay As You Are_
(1978) with Nastassja Kinski; Fellini's _City of Women_ (1980) and _Ginger and
Fred_ (1986); Marco Bellocchio's _Henry IV_ (1984); _Macaroni_ (1985) with
Jack Lemmon; Nikita Mikhalkov's _Dark Eyes_ (1987) with Marthe Keller;
Giuseppe Tornatore's _Everybody's Fine_ (1990); _Used People_ (1992) with
Shirley MacLaine; and Agnès Varda's _One Hundred and One Nights_ (1995).

He was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor three times: for
_Divorce Italian Style_ , _A Special Day_ and _Dark Eyes_. Mastroianni, Dean
Stockwell and Jack Lemmon are the only actors to have been twice awarded the
Best Actor at the Cannes Film Festival. Mastroianni won it in 1970 for _The
Pizza Triangle_ and in 1987 for _Dark Eyes_.

Mastroianni starred alongside his daughter, Chiara Mastroianni, in Raúl Ruiz's
_Three Lives and Only One Death_ in 1996. For this performance he won the
Silver Wave Award at the Ft. Lauderdale International Film Festival. His final
film, _Voyage to the Beginning of the World_ (1997), was released
posthumously.

Mastroianni married Flora Carabella (1926–1999) on 12 August 1950.[2] They had
one daughter together, Barbara (1951–2018),[3] but separated in 1970 because
of his affairs with younger women.[2][4] Mastroianni's first serious
relationship after the separation was with Faye Dunaway, his co-star in _A
Place for Lovers_ (1968). Dunaway wanted to marry and have children, but
Mastroianni, a Catholic, refused to divorce Carabella.[2] In 1971, after three
years of waiting for Mastroianni to change his mind, Dunaway left him.[2]
Decades later, Dunaway said: "I wish to this day it had worked out."[5]

Mastroianni had a daughter, Chiara Mastroianni (born 28 May 1972), with French
actress Catherine Deneuve, who was nearly 20 years his junior and lived with
him for four years in the 1970s. During that time, the couple made four movies
together: _It Only Happens to Others_ (1971), _La cagna_ (1972), _A Slightly
Pregnant Man_ (1973) and _Don't Touch the White Woman!_ (1974). After
Mastroianni and Deneuve broke up, Carabella reportedly offered to adopt Chiara
because her parents' work kept them away so often. Deneuve would have none of
it.[6]

According to _People_ magazine, Mastroianni's other lovers included actresses
Anouk Aimee, Ursula Andress, Claudia Cardinale and Lauren Hutton.[2] Around
1976, he became involved with Anna Maria Tatò, an author and filmmaker. They
remained together until his death.[2]

He was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic
in 1994.[7]

Mastroianni died of pancreatic cancer on 19 December 1996 at the age of
72.[8][9] Both of his daughters, as well as Deneuve and Tatò, were at his
bedside.[2] The Trevi Fountain in Rome, associated with his role in Fellini's
_La Dolce Vita_ , was symbolically turned off and draped in black as a
tribute.[9][10]

At the 1997 Venice Film Festival, Chiara, Carabella and Deneuve tried to block
the screening of Tatò's four-hour documentary, _Marcello Mastroianni: I
Remember_.[11] The festival refused and the movie was shown.[11] The three
women reportedly tried to do the same thing at Cannes.[11] Tatò said
Mastroianni had willed her all rights to his image.[11]

