**Max's Restaurant** , sometimes known as **Max's of Manila** or simply
**Max's** , is a Philippine-based multinational restaurant chain which serves
fried chicken and other Filipino dishes. It is owned and operated by the Max's
Group.[1]

Max's Restaurant's beginnings started in 1945, after World War II. Maximo
Gimenez, a Stanford-educated teacher, befriended the American occupation
troops stationed at Quezon City. Because of this friendship, the soldiers
regularly visited Maximo's nearby home for a drink or two. Later on, the
troops insisted that they pay for their drinks.This prompted Maximo to open a
cafe, where the troops could enjoy food and drinks.[2] It opened its first
restaurant at 21 South F Street (now Scout Tuason), Brgy. Laging Handa, Quezon
City.

The cafe initially served chicken, steak and drinks. Maximo's niece, Ruby, who
managed the kitchen, created a special recipe for chicken that became an
instant favorite for the GIs. Soon, the Filipino public heard about the
delicious chicken recipe and thus they came to the small restaurant and Max's
Restaurant was born.

Over the years, Max's Restaurant's popularity grew and it became known as "the
house that fried chicken built." It has expanded in Metro Manila, Southern and
Northern Luzon, Cebu, and to California and other places in the United States.
It has also expanded to Canada with plans of opening restaurants to other
countries.

Max's Restaurant has established itself as a household name in the
Philippines, an institution, and a proud Filipino tradition. The second and
third generations of the family continue to zealously uphold the standards and
traditions set by Maximo and Ruby for all Max's Restaurants.

It opened its doors to franchising in the second quarter of 1998.[3]

The company that manages Max's Restaurant, Max's Group, also currently
operates Pancake House, Dencio's, Kabisera, Teriyaki Boy, Sizzlin' Steak, Le
Coeur De France, Maple, Yellow Cab, Singkit, and The Chicken Rice Shop.[4]

Max's Restaurant currently has over 127 branches in the Philippines. The chain
also has branches in the U.S. states of California, Hawaii, New Jersey and a
Nevada branch soon to open. It has 5 locations in Canada in Toronto, Ontario,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Edmonton, Alberta, Winnipeg, Manitoba, and
Calgary, Alberta. In a September 2014 press event, it was announced that more
branches will be opened by 2015 in: Sydney, Australia; Dubai, United Arab
Emirates; and Queens, New York. In 2016 Max's was also opened in Salmiya,
Kuwait.

Max's Restaurant at SM City Pampanga in Mexico, Pampanga.

Max's Restaurant at Festival Supermall

Max's Restaurant at SM City Baliuag

Max's Corner Bakery

The restaurant's signature dish is its fried chicken. Aside from this, Max's
Chicken also offers traditional Filipino dishes such as, _kare-kare_ ,
_nilagang báka_, _sinigang_ , _crispy pata_ , _tapsilog_ , _lóngsilog_, and
_litsón kawalî_.[5][6][7]

In earlier television and cinema advertisements, the restaurant usually
marketed itself as a place for Filipino families to get together. In 1993, it
also established its slogan " _Sarap_ to the bones!" ("Delicious to the
bones!").

From April to June 2004, a popular series of television advertisements,
entitled "Forever Yours" told the story of a Max's employee who was the
childhood love of a popular TV celebrity, played by Piolo Pascual. The series
showed the two characters as children, then as adults accidentally meeting at
Max's. The denouement of the story is when the celebrity recognizes the
employee from their childhood. This commercial became so popular that it
launched the showbiz career of Isabel Oli, the model who played the
employee.[8][9]

Aside from its advertising, the story of how Max's Restaurant started has
entered into popular culture. It was portrayed in the episode " _Sino si_
Max?" ("Who is Max?") of the long-running Filipino drama anthology _Maalaala
Mo Kaya_.[10] So far, Max's had 4 celebrity endorsers: Gary Valenciano
(1996–1999, now with Jollibee), Piolo Pascual (2002–2009, now with Turks and
Dunkin' Donuts), Isabel Oli-Prats (2004–2009) and Coco Martin (2012–2014, now
with Mang Inasal), and all of them are under contract of ABS-CBN.

