The **Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry** (経済産業省, _Keizai-sangyō-shō_ )
or **METI** , is a ministry of the Government of Japan. It was created by the
2001 Central Government Reform when the Ministry of International Trade and
Industry merged with agencies from other ministries related to economic
activities, such as the Economic Planning Agency.

METI has jurisdiction over a broad policy area, containing Japan's
industrial/trade policies, energy security, control of arms exports, "Cool
Japan", etc. METI is known for its liberal atmosphere and officials of METI
have been well known for their excellence. It is commonly called "human
resource agency" for its leaders of politics, business and academia.

METI is organized into the following bureaus, offices, departments and 3
agencies (Agency for Natural Resources and Energy, Small and Medium Enterprise
Agency, Japan Patent Office):

The Information-Technology Promotion Agency (情報処理推進機構) is an Independent
Administrative Institution that was created in January 2004 in order to better
carry out on behalf of METI certain provisions of the **Act on Facilitation of
Information Processing** ( _Information Processing law, 1970 Law No. 90_ ).
The agency was created from a former Incorporated Administrative Agency of the
same name (founded 1986) within the ministry. Its primary role is to promote
the development and effective use of Japanese made Information Technology at
home and abroad, and in addition help ensure IT's positive effect on both
society and the national economy. As of the late 2000s, the agency was
concentrating on improving the competitiveness of Japanese created software in
the global marketplace, though the ongoing development of advanced hardware is
also still considered to be of importance. The former includes the nurturing
of the next generation of Japanese software developers. As part of this, it
for a long time played a major role in setting and enforcing standards in the
Japanese IT industry, in particular in the area of software development. In
2010 however, in a (ultimately highly unsuccessful) reorganization carried out
by the then ruling party, certain functions of the IPA in this area were
controversially privatized. Among other things, the _Information Technology
Engineers Examination Center_ which had been previously an important component
of the IPA's maintenance of IT standards was disbanded by 2011. Various other
important projects & initiatives were scrapped or severely disrupted. The IPA
also has a role in helping to co-ordinate national security aspects of IT,
though neglect by successive governments meant that until recently this was
more apparent than real.

Presently as of 2015, certain elements and functions of the IPA are still in
flux, due both to the aforementioned botched 2010 'reform' along with various
attempts since then to try to fix the damage, and recent negative developments
in the area of IT security for Japan's government & industries.

Coordinates: 35°40′19″N 139°45′04″E﻿ / ﻿35.672°N 139.751°E﻿ / 35.672; 139.751

