**Andrea Kay** " **Missi** " **Pyle** (born November 16, 1972) is an American
actress and singer. She has appeared in several films, including the award-
winning films _The Artist_ , _Galaxy Quest_ , _DodgeBall: A True Underdog
Story_ , _Big Fish_ , _50 First Dates_ , _Charlie and the Chocolate Factory_ ,
_Harold& Kumar Escape from Guantanamo Bay_, _Gone Girl_ , and _Ma_.

She has also appeared in various television roles, on shows such as _Mad About
You_ , _Friends_ , _Heroes_ , _Two and a Half Men_ , _Frasier_ , _My Name Is
Earl_ , _2 Broke Girls_ , _Jennifer Falls_ , and _Mom_. She was also half of
Smith & Pyle, a country rock band, with actress Shawnee Smith. She also
appeared in the music video for Foo Fighters' single "Run" as a nurse.

Pyle, the youngest daughter of Linda and Frank Pyle, was born in Houston,
Texas, and raised in Memphis, Tennessee. She has two older sisters, Debbie and
Julie; two older brothers, Sam and Paul; one younger half-brother, Gordon; and
a half-sister, Meredith.[ _citation needed_ ] Pyle attended the North Carolina
School of the Arts in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and graduated in 1995.
For her achievements, Pyle was honored by the Poplar Pike Playhouse at her
alma mater Germantown High School in Germantown, Tennessee.

Pyle has guest starred on many television shows, including _Heroes_ , _Mad
About You_ , _Boston Legal_ , _Frasier_ , _The Sarah Silverman Program_ , and
_2 Broke Girls_. She started her film career with a minor role in _As Good as
It Gets_ , starring Helen Hunt and Jack Nicholson. After her breakout role in
_Galaxy Quest_ , she had supporting roles in _Bringing Down the House_ (for
which she and Queen Latifah were nominated for an MTV Movie Award for Best
Fight), _Josie and the Pussycats_ , _Home Alone 4_ , _Exposed_ , _Big Fish_ ,
_Along Came Polly_ , _Soul Plane_ , _Stormbreaker_ , and _Charlie and the
Chocolate Factory_. She was also the female lead in _BachelorMan_. She also
appears in _Dodgeball: A True Underdog Story_. She also had a brief appearance
in _50 First Dates_ and starred in _A Cinderella Story: Once Upon a Song_.

Pyle played Jake's Elementary School teacher Ms. Pasternak on _Two and a Half
Men_. The role was recast in 2009 for undisclosed reasons, but Pyle returned
to the series in the same role in 2011 and again in the series finale "Of
Course He's Dead" in 2015.

In 2008, Missi starred in the Broadway play _Boeing-Boeing_ opposite Christine
Baranski, Mark Rylance, Greg Germann, Paige Davis and Rebecca Gayheart. The
play closed in January 2009.

Pyle was scheduled to ring the closing bell for the trading day at the New
York Stock Exchange on September 29, 2008 to promote _Boeing-Boeing_ , but
backed out minutes before the close of trading in order to not associate
herself with ending a calamitous day of financial turmoil which resulted in
the Dow Jones Industrial Average losing 778 points, the largest point loss
ever in a session in the wake of the financial crisis of 2007â€“2008. She
watched from the floor as an NYSE staffer pushed the button and gaveled the
end of trading instead.[1]

She was part of a country music group with actress Shawnee Smith called Smith
& Pyle. The two actresses met while filming an ABC comedy pilot titled
_Traveling in Packs_. The band started after Smith invited Pyle to join her in
attending the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. While stuck in
traffic, Pyle talked about her dream to be a rock star and Smith agreed to
form a band with her. Their first album, "It's OK to Be Happy", was released
digitally through iTunes and Amazon.com in July 2008. The debut album was
recorded in Joshua Tree, California at Rancho de la Luna and was produced by
Chris Goss. The two actresses have also become business partners and formed
their own record label called Urban Prairie Records, under which "It's OK to
be Happy" was released. According to an interview Smith did with pretty-
scary.net in August 2008, a Smith & Pyle television or webisode series might
be in the works. Smith also mentioned the idea of a series on Fangoria radio
with Dee Snider.[2] Currently there are 3 videos posted on YouTube that show
the making of the record. They also have a 10-minute "making of" video on
Vimeo called _Smith & Pyle: Desert Sessions_.[3][4]

Pyle was married to author Antonio Sacre from 2000 to 2005.

Pyle married naturalist Casey Anderson on September 12, 2008. The wedding was
country-western themed and took place in Montana. Wedding guests included
bandmate Shawnee Smith and comedian Steve Agee. Anderson's pet grizzly bear,
Brutus, served as his best man in the ceremony.[5] Pyle and Anderson appeared
in "Grizzly Dogs", the October 22, 2010 episode of _Dog Whisperer_ , in which
they sought the help of Cesar Millan to rehabilitate their dog.[6] Pyle
confirmed their breakup in 2013.[7]

The drag queen "Pissi Myles" is named after her.[8]

