**Mississippi State University for Agriculture and Applied Science** ,[6][7]
commonly known as **Mississippi State University** ( **MSU** ), is a public
land-grant research university adjacent to Starkville, Mississippi.[8][9] With
21,353 students at its main campus, it is the largest campus by enrollment in
the state.[10] It is classified in the category of "R1: Doctoral Universities
– Very High Research Activity" by the Carnegie Foundation and has a total
research and development budget of $239.4 million, the largest in
Mississippi.[11] It is listed as one of the state's flagship
universities.[12][13]

The university was chartered as **Mississippi Agricultural & Mechanical
College** on February 28, 1878 and admitted its first students in 1880.
Organized into 12 colleges and schools, the university offers over 180
baccalaureate, graduate, and professional degree programs,[14] and is home to
Mississippi's only accredited programs in architecture and veterinary
medicine. Mississippi State participates in the National Sea Grant College
Program and National Space Grant College and Fellowship Program. The
university's main campus in Starkville is supplemented by auxiliary campuses
in Meridian, Biloxi, and Vicksburg, Mississippi. The 19th and current
president of Mississippi State is Mark E. Keenum, a former United States Under
Secretary of Agriculture.

Mississippi State's intercollegiate sports teams, known as the Mississippi
State Bulldogs, compete in NCAA Division I athletics as members of the
Southeastern Conference's western division. Mississippi State was a founding
member of the SEC in 1932. In their more-than 120-year history, the Bulldogs
have won 21 individual national championships[15] and 30 regular season
conference championships. The school is noted for a pervasive baseball fan
culture,[16] with Dudy Noble Field holding 17 of the top 25 all-time NCAA
attendance records and the school's Left Field Lounge being described as an
epicenter of college baseball.[17]

The university began as **The Agricultural and Mechanical College of the State
of Mississippi** (or **Mississippi A &M**), one of the national land-grant
colleges established after Congress passed the Morrill Act in 1862. It was
created by the Mississippi Legislature on February 28, 1878, to fulfill the
mission of offering training in "agriculture, horticulture and the mechanical
arts ... without excluding other scientific and classical studies, including
military tactics." The university received its first students in the fall of
1880 in the presidency of General Stephen D. Lee.

In 1887 Congress passed the Hatch Act, which provided for the establishment of
the Agricultural Experiment Station in 1888. The Cooperative Extension Service
was established in 1914 by the Smith-Lever Act. The university has since had
its mission expanded and redefined by the Legislature. In 1932, the
Legislature renamed the university as **Mississippi State College**.

In 1958 the Legislature renamed the university Mississippi State University in
recognition of its academic development and addition of graduate programs. The
Graduate School had been organized (1936), doctoral degree programs had begun
(1951), the School of Forest Resources had been established (1954), and the
College of Arts and Sciences had replaced the General Science School (1956).

The university was uneventfully desegregated in July 1965, when Richard E.
Holmes, a graduate of Henderson High School in Starkville, became the first
African-American student to enroll. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was passed by
Congress the year before, the Voting Rights Act of 1965 was being debated, and
the United States Supreme Court had ruled in _Brown v. Board of Education_
(1954) that segregation of public schools was unconstitutional.[18]

The School of Architecture admitted its first students in 1973, the College of
Veterinary Medicine admitted its first class in 1977. The MSU Vet school
(commonly referred to as the CVM) is the largest veterinary school under one
roof in the nation. The School of Accountancy was established in 1979.

The University Honors Program was founded in 1968 to provide more rigorous
course curricula for academically talented students and support guest lecture
series, forums, and distinguished external scholarships. The program has been
vastly expanded and has a separate college. This was made possible by funding
by Bobby Shackouls, an MSU alumnus and retired CEO, who donated US$10 million
to found the Judy and Bobby Shackouls Honors College in April 2006.[19]

MSU also started a joint Ph.D. program in engineering with San Jose State
University in California, allowing an increase in research for both
universities, as well as enhancing the stature of both engineering
colleges.[20]

In March 2009, Mississippi State announced the conclusion of the university's
seven-year capital campaign, with more than $462 million received in private
gifts and pledges.[21]

Mississippi State University is accredited by the Commission on Colleges of
the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award baccalaureate,
master's, specialist, and doctoral degrees.

Today, the university has the following colleges and schools:

As of Fall 2011, Mississippi State's enrollment was 20,424.[22] The university
has 160 buildings, and the grounds comprise about 4,200 acres (17 km²),
including farms, pastures, and woodlands of the Experiment Station. The
university also owns an additional 80,000 acres (320 km²) across the state.

Mississippi State University operates an off-campus, degree-granting center in
Meridian that offers undergraduate and graduate programs. In cooperation with
the U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station, the College of
Engineering offers the Master of Science degree to students in Vicksburg.

Mississippi State's campus is centered on the main quadrangle, called the
_Drill Field_ (pictured) due to its heavy use by the Corps of Cadets prior to
the end of World War II. The Drill Field is defined at its north and south
ends by the mirror-image buildings, _Lee Hall_ (the original University
building, now the division of languages building, far left in picture below)
and _Swalm Hall_ (home to the Dave C. Swalm School of Chemical Engineering,
far right in picture below). Old Main was the original dormitory, west of Lee
Hall; it burned in a tragic fire, and was replaced by the Colvard Student
Union. The largest building fronting the Drill Field is Mitchell Memorial
Library.[ _citation needed_ ]

From the Drill Field, the campus radiates in all directions. The College of
Engineering can be found mostly to the east side of the Drill Field; to the
north are the Arts and Sciences, including Computer Science, and the College
of Architecture, Art, and Design (CAAD). Humanities are found to the south,
while Agriculture dominates the west section. To the west and northwest are
also found the athletic facilities, including Scott Field and the Humphrey
Coliseum, or _The Hump_.

Beyond the main campus (and the series of commuter parking lots ringing the
main campus) are the North and South Farms. While still used for their
original purpose of agricultural research, the Farms are also host to newer
facilities, such as the astronomical observatory and Veterinary College (South
Farm) and the High Performance Computing Collaboratory (North Farm). At the
far west of campus, one finds first the fraternity and sorority houses, and
beyond them the Cotton District and downtown Starkville, Mississippi. The
university is also home to the Thad Cochran Research, Technology and Economic
Development Park, which host many of the university's research centers, such
as the Center for Advanced Vehicular Systems (CAVS) and the nationally
recognized Social Science Research Center.

The Williams Building, which houses the MSU Police Department and the Faculty
Senate,[23] was designed by architect Emmett J. Hull.[24]

The Mitchell Memorial Library is in the heart of the campus, on the eastern
side of the Drill Field.[25] The library has a collection of 2,124,341 volumes
and 70,331 journals.[26]

Mississippi State is one of the few universities to house presidential papers.
In May 2012, on the 50th anniversary of the founding of the Ulysses S. Grant
Association, Mississippi State University was selected as the permanent
location for Ulysses S. Grant's Presidential Library. President Grant's
artifacts are to remain permanently at the Mitchell Memorial Library on the
MSU campus. These include Grant's letters and photographs during his
presidency, from 1869 to 1877. The MSU library catalogued and cross-referenced
15,000 linear feet of material. Grant's letters have been edited and published
in 32 volumes by the Ulysses S. Grant Association and the Southern Illinois
University Press.[27][28]

The library is also home to the Congressional and Political Research Center,
which is on the first floor. This center, established in November 1999, houses
the collections of US Senator John C. Stennis and Congressman G. V.
Montgomery, nicknamed "Sonny". Their careers spanned a total of 72 years of
service as Congressional leaders. The Center also provides research materials
and information on individual US Senators and Representatives, the US
Congress, and politics at all levels of government. It has begun to take on a
significant research and policy role on a state, regional and national
level.[29]

Among the library's premier collections is that of internationally known
author John Grisham, an MSU alumnus who donated his papers to the university
in 1989. Grisham's collection, now consisting of over 42 cubic feet, has also
attracted national attention to the library. Materials from the Grisham papers
are on display in Mitchell Memorial Library's John Grisham Room (3rd floor),
which opened in May 1998. The libraries also receive his published works,
including foreign-language translations.[30]

In 2000, the Charles H. Templeton Collection, which includes over 200
nineteenth- and twentieth-century music instruments, 22,000 pieces of sheet
music, and 13,000 records, was transferred to the Libraries. According to
world-renowned author and musicologist David A. Jasen, the Templeton
Collection contains the most complete collection of Victor Talking Machines
from their debut in 1897 to 1930. This Collection, valued at over $495,000 in
1989, serves as one of the libraries' premier collections. Items from the
collection are on display at the Templeton Music Museum on the 4th floor of
Mitchell Memorial Library. In 2001, a digitization project was established to
digitize and provide access to the entire sheet music collection. To date, the
project has digitized, archived and cataloged over 6,000 pieces of music.[31]

The library hosts the Charles Templeton Ragtime Jazz Festival, an annual event
including lectures and live performance of historic and contemporary ragtime.
The festival debuted in March 2007, the first of its kind in Mississippi. The
multi-day event features seminars, tours of the Templeton Music Museum, and
concerts by some of the world's most renowned ragtime and jazz musicians.[32]

Formerly the poorly-conceived convergence of five often-congested roadways
and, earlier, a rail line, this student-inspired concept got its name from the
term "Malfunction Junction," the informal name of the crossroads prior to the
vacation and rerouting of some of the roadways. This resulted in improved
traffic flow and ample new green space for leisure activities and events,
including football tailgating.

Anchored by Davis Wade Stadium, Barnes & Noble Bookstore and the University
Welcome Center, the Junction is the focal point of a pedestrian-friendly
central campus and a significant gathering place for students, alumni and
visitors. It is linked by paved walkways and green space to the university's
other manicured "lawn", the historic Drill Field.

Residence halls at Mississippi State University:

Traditional style halls:

New construction halls:

Old Main, originally called the Main Dormitory, was the first building on the
campus.[33] The first section of Old Main was built in 1880. Additions were
constructed in 1901, 1903, 1906, and 1922. It is considered to have been the
largest college dormitory in the United States. The building was destroyed by
fire on the night of January 22, 1959. Henry Williamson, one of the dorm's
1,100 residents, died in the fire. Bricks salvaged from the fire were used to
build the Chapel of Memories.[34] Bricks from Old Main were also dumped in the
area that became the band practice field for many years behind the Industrial
Educational Building.

Roy Vernon Scott, professor emeritus of history at MSU, is the author of _Old
Main: Memories of a Legend_.[35]

In 2014 the university began construction of a new academic building located
at the corner of George Perry Street and Barr Avenue, behind the YMCA
building. This building includes architectural elements that are similar in
style to the Old Main Dormitory previously located on the west side of the
Drill Field.[36] It will be named the "Old Main" Academic Center.[37]

MSU has over 300 student organizations. Prominent groups include the Student
Association, Famous Maroon Band, MSU Road Runners, Alumni Delegates, Maroon
VIP, Lambda Sigma, Orientation Leaders, 18 fraternities and 11 sororities, the
Residence Hall Association, the Black Student Alliance, the Mississippi State
University College Democrats and Republicans, Music Maker Productions, the
Baptist Student Union, the Engineering Student Council, Arnold Air Society,
the Stennis-Montgomery Association and ChallengeX. There are many
international student organizations active on campus, including the Nepalese
Student Association and ISA,[ _citation needed_ ] which organize various
programs to educate students about their culture and traditions. The national
literary magazine _Jabberwock Review_ is also based at MSU.

Mississippi State's local radio station is WMSV.

Prior to WMSV, Mississippi State had a student-run radio station, WMSB, which
went off the air permanently at the end of the spring semester of 1986. WMSB
was a low-power FM station with studios on the top floor of Lee Hall. WMSB was
begun in the fall semester of 1971 in a freshman dorm room on the third floor
of Critz Hall, utilizing an FM stereo transmitter that was designed and built
as a high school science fair project by one of the station's founders. The
station's original call letters were RHOM. Later, funding was solicited from
the Student Association. Funding was approved, the low-power RCA FM
transmitter was ordered and the call letters WMSB were issued by the FCC. The
station was moved to studios on the top floor of Lee Hall that were formerly
occupied by a student-run AM station.[ _citation needed_ ]

The student newspaper is the _Reflector_ , published twice per week on Tuesday
and Friday. The publication was named the #1 college newspaper in the South in
2007 by the Southeast Journalism Conference. In previous years, the
_Reflector_ consistently ranked in the top 10 among college newspapers in the
southern United States.[ _citation needed_ ]

Mississippi State is home to WMSV, the campus radio station, which routinely
plays older alternative mainstream rock and pop from the 1990s. Much of the
music on the radio station comes from syndicated radio programs from Public
Radio International, but the station's homegrown music programs on Sunday
afternoons and evenings emphasize jazz and blues classics.

Mississippi State and the city of Starkville play host the annual "Bulldog
Bash", considered the largest outdoor concert in the state. The event is free
and held in the Starkville Cotton District.

During the spring semester the Old Main Music Festival takes place, it is also
free to the public, and is held on the Mississippi State Campus it has
featured artist such as Trey Songz, Sugarland and OneRepublic.[38]

The city of Starkville and the Mississippi State campus have been a tour stop
for many artists such as 2 chainz, Bon Jovi, Elvis Presley, Bob Dylan,[39] and
most famously Johnny Cash in 1965. After Cash's performance he was arrested,
which led him to write the song "Starkville City Jail".[40]

Every semester Mississippi State has several distinguished speakers; these
have included best selling authors Greg Mortenson[41] and Mississippi State
alumnus John Grisham,[42] former United States Secretary of State Condoleezza
Rice, Academy Award-nominated Spike Lee,[43] television science show hosts
Jeff Lieberman[44] and Dr. Neil deGrasse Tyson.[45] Nobel laureates including
Sir Harry Kroto (1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry),[46] J. M. G. Le Clézio (2008
Nobel Prize in Literature)[47] and Joseph Stiglitz (2001 Nobel Memorial Prize
in Economic Sciences)[48] have also appeared.

Mississippi State University is a member of the SEC Academic Consortium. Now
renamed the SECU, the initiative was a collaborative endeavor designed to
promote research, scholarship and achievement among the member universities in
the Southeastern Conference. The SECU formed its mission to serve as a means
to bolster collaborative academic endeavors of Southeastern Conference
universities. Its goals include highlighting the endeavors and achievements of
SEC faculty, students and its universities and advancing the academic
reputation of SEC universities.[49][50]

In 2013, Mississippi State University participated in the SEC Symposium in
Atlanta, Georgia, which was organized and led by the University of Georgia and
the UGA Bioenergy Systems Research Institute. The topic of the symposium was
"Impact of the Southeast in the World's Renewable Energy Future."[51]

Mississippi State's Greek system comprises 19 fraternities (IFC and NPHC) and
13 sororities (Panhellenic and NPHC). Fraternities and sororities take part in
a number of philanthropic programs and provide social opportunities for
students. Formal rush takes place at the start of every fall semester for
Panhellenic and IFC organizations. Membership intake for NPHC organizations
occurs at specified times.

Greek affiliation is popular at Mississippi State University. Approximately
20% of the student population participates in the Greek system.

Mississippi State University's sixteen athletic teams are known as the
Bulldogs, which was adopted in 1961. Previous nicknames included the Aggies
and the Maroons. Since 1935, the official mascot for Mississippi State has
been a live English Bulldog named Bully. They compete in Division I of the
NCAA and the western division of the 14-member Southeastern Conference (SEC).
The Bulldogs have garnered a total of 28 conference championships (14 SEC).
Mississippi State's most successful sport is baseball. The Diamond Dogs have
won 17 conference championships (11 SEC) and 6 SEC tournament championships,
while making 28 NCAA Tournament, and 10 College World Series appearances,
including a 2nd-place finish in 2013. The Diamond Dogs play home games at Dudy
Noble Field, Polk-DeMent Stadium, which holds the NCAA record for the largest
single on-campus baseball attendance at 15,586 (April 12, 2014, vs.
Mississippi).

Mississippi State men's basketball has won 10 conference regular season
championships (6 SEC), 4 conference tournament championships, and 7 divisional
championships. The Bulldogs have made 10 NCAA Tournament appearances,
highlighted by 3 Sweet Sixteen appearances and a trip to the Final Four in
1996. Both MSU men's and women's basketball teams play home games at Humphrey
Coliseum, nicknamed "The Hump", one of the most intimidating places to play in
the SEC with a seating capacity of 10,500.

Bulldog football is also a favorite among the MSU faithful. The Bulldogs play
their home games at Davis Wade Stadium, the second oldest Division I-FBS
football stadium in the nation, with a seating capacity of 61,337. Bulldog
fans are known throughout the nation for bringing cowbells to "ring"
Mississippi State on to victory. Cowbells became part of Mississippi State
tradition in the 1970s, and were banned by the SEC in 1977, defined as
"artificial noisemakers". For over 30 years, fans would secretly sneak their
cowbells into the stadium, while security guards carefully "inspected" fans'
possessions, continuing the unique tradition. In 2010, the SEC officially
lifted the ban on artificial noisemakers, allowing fans to "ring responsibly"
during pregame, timeouts, halftime, and Bulldog touchdowns. Mississippi
State's first SEC championship came in 1941, as the Bulldogs finished with an
8-1-1 record. The Bulldogs also appeared in the 1998 SEC Championship Game
after winning the SEC Western Division championship, before falling to
eventual national champion Tennessee 14-24. Overall, MSU has appeared in 17
postseason bowl games, highlighted by trips to the Orange Bowl in 1937, 1941,
and 2015. The official fight song and battle cry of Mississippi State is "Hail
State", which is played by the Famous Maroon Band, the university's marching
band.

**Graduate**  
_U.S. News & World Report National Rankings'_[64]

Marsha Blackburn  
U.S. Senator from Tennessee

Van Chancellor  
Basketball coach, 4-time WNBA champion

Will Clark  
Baseball player, 6-time MLB All-Star

Jerry Clower  
Stand-up comedian

Leonard B. Cresswell  
Major general in the Marines, Navy Cross recipient

Fletcher Cox  
American football player, 3-time Pro Bowler

Erick Dampier  
Basketball player, played 16 seasons in the NBA

Kermit Davis  
Basketball coach, Ole Miss Rebels

John Grisham  
Author of popular legal thrillers

Mark Keenum  
Current president of Mississippi State University

G.V. "Sonny" Montgomery  
Member of U.S. House of Representatives, 1967-1997

Matthew Mitchell  
Head women's basketball coach, Kentucky Wildcats

Alan Nunnelee  
Member of U.S. House of Representatives, 2011-2015

Rafael Palmeiro  
Baseball player, 3,020 hits, 569 home runs

Jonathan Papelbon  
Baseball player, 368 career saves

Dak Prescott  
American football player, 2016 NFL Rookie of the Year

Buck Showalter  
Baseball manager

John C. Stennis  
U.S. Senator, 1947-1989

Scott Stricklin  
Athletic director, Florida Gators

Amy Tuck  
Lieutenant Governor of Mississippi, 2000-2008

Jarvis Varnado  
Basketball player, career NCAA blocks leader

