**Mountain View** is a city located in Santa Clara County, California,[12]
United States, named for its views of the Santa Cruz Mountains.[13] From its
origins as a stagecoach stop, it grew to a large suburb with a pedestrian-
friendly downtown and a population of 74,066.[14] The city borders Palo Alto
and the San Francisco Bay to the north, Los Altos to the south, and Moffett
Federal Airfield and Sunnyvale to the east.

Situated in the southern end of the peninsula in the San Francisco Bay Area,
in the northwest corner of Santa Clara county, Mountain View is home to many
high technology companies. In 1956, Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory, the
first company to develop silicon semiconductor devices in what came to be
known as Silicon Valley, was established in the city by William Shockley.
Today, many of the largest technology companies in the world are headquartered
in the city, including Google, Mozilla Foundation, Symantec, and Intuit. The
original Byte Shop computer store was opened at 1063 El Camino Real, Mountain
View, by Paul Terrell, and the first 50 Apple I computers were sold from that
location. The Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority integrates the city
with the neighboring cities of Palo Alto, Los Altos, and Sunnyvale.

The Mexican land grant of Rancho Pastoria de las Borregas was given in 1842 by
Alta California Governor Juan Alvarado to Francisco Estrada. This grant was
later passed on to Mariano Castro, who sold half of the land to Martin Murphy,
Jr. Eventually, the former land grant became the cities of Mountain View and
Sunnyvale.

The area, which is on the southwest shore of San Francisco Bay, was settled in
1852 as a stagecoach station. By the early 1900s, it was a shipping point for
fruit and grain, as well as a center of religious book publishing.[15]

It was first known as the major center of Fremont Twp. before the first
California 1852 census, for Santa Clara County. [Fremont township is bounded
on the north by San Mateo county and a portion of the bay of San Francisco; on
the east by Alviso and Santa Clara townships; on the south by Redwood
township, and on the west by San Mateo county.] Which meant that it was a
predecessor to Mayfield and Palo Alto. Mountain View Station, officially named
in 1864, had its beginnings earlier as a stagecoach stop on the route between
San Francisco and San Jose, including the Butterfield Overland Mail.
Incorporated on November 7, 1902. Phyllis Ave. & El Camino Real of today, was
closer to what was once the original town center and its then San Jose Road.
The early pioneers were commonly buried at the old cemetery between Mercy &
Church, off Castro Street, now the present city Library and park, aka Pioneer
Park. Reverend Henry Merrill Henderson, born in Maryland, age 35, arrived in
Spring of 1852, with his family to meet with relatives Ricketts and many
others from Missouri and Kentucky. He was the first Baptist minister in town
and soon was going by horse to Half-Moon Bay, and McCartersville (Saratoga)
for services. His next-door neighbor arrived later that year, Seligman
Weilheimer and brother Samuel from Dossenheim, Baden, Germany, who built at
that property, the first big general merchandise store in 1856. The Fremont
twp. population was about 560 by 1860, less Mayfield Post office section,
which began north of present San Antonio Road. The town's early growth was due
to agriculture, William Bubb later being a town figure, buying 80 acres to
farm in October 1851, where he died in 1864. His heirs expanded and
intermarried in the area. Agriculture remained the primary industry into the
middle of the 20th century. The U.S. Navy's adjacent 1000 acre Moffett Field
Complex began after 1931 and brought many economic opportunities . After World
War II, the population grew significantly with the development of the
aerospace and electronics industries.[16] Between 1950 and 1960, the
population grew from 6,563 to 30,889, an increase of 370.7%.

Between 1929 and 1994, the city was the home of the Moffett Field Naval Air
Station. In 1940, the city became the home of the National Advisory Committee
for Aeronautics (now the NASA Ames Research Center), influencing the city's
development of its aerospace and electronics industries.[15]

Today, high technology is the foundation of the local economy, and there exist
few remnants of the city's agricultural past. In 1990, Kevin Duggan began his
position as city manager. He built a relationship with Google, Inc., and
issued a long-term lease to that and other technology companies. As of 2014,
those leases generate over $5 million per year in city revenue. Duggan
reinstituted a special tax district for the Shoreline area, which was a
landfill and pig farm in 1990. That money allowed the city to create a large
park and golf course on the site. The Castro Street downtown area also
benefited from a special tax district.[17]

In 2016, the city's voters approved a rent control ordinance.[18][19]

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of
12.3 sq mi (31.8 km2), of which 12.0 sq mi (31.1 km2) is land and 0.27 sq mi
(0.7 km2) (2.26%) is water.

Mountain View is located at the north end of State Route 85, where it meets
U.S. Route 101. State Route 82 follows the route of the historic El Camino
Real through Mountain View. The city is bounded to the northwest by Palo Alto,
to the north by the Bay, to the south and southwest by Los Altos, and to the
east by Sunnyvale and Moffett Federal Airfield.

To the west lie the Santa Cruz Mountains, after which the city is named and
which separate it from the Pacific Ocean. To the east lies the Diablo Range.
The two ranges demarcate the Santa Clara Valley.

Most of Mountain View consists of residential neighborhoods. Business parks
are located mostly in the North Shoreline neighborhood, north of Highway 101,
and east of Highway 85.

Mountain View has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate (KÃ¶ppen climate
classification _Csb_ : dry-summer subtropical).[20] Summers are warm and dry,
while winters are mild and wet. However, both summers and winters are somewhat
moderated due to its relative proximity to the Pacific, although it has a
lesser maritime influence than San Francisco further north on the peninsula.

Mountain View is one of the major cities that make up Silicon Valley, and has
many notable Silicon Valley companies either headquartered there or with a
large presence. As of 2018, major tech companies such as Google[22] and
Mozilla were headquartered in Mountain View.[23] In 2018, the comparison site
CareerBliss ranked the city number 1 in the United States on its list of
Happiest Cities to Work for 2018.[24]

After voting to increase the minimum wage incrementally in 2015, in December
2017, the Mountain View City Council implemented a mandatory $15 minimum wage,
to apply to employees who work two or more hours a week.[25] At the start of
2018, Mountain View raised its minimum wage to $15.00.[26] Starting on January
1, 2019, the minimum wage will be "adjusted annually based on the San
Francisco-Oakland-San Jose regional Consumer Price Index."[25] A proposal to
slow down the rate of the wage increases by a year[27][28] was defeated in a
City Council meeting on December 4, 2018.[29] Subsequently, on December 30,
2018, it was announced that Mountain View's minimum wage would rise to $15.65
on January 1, 2019, with the increase delayed by one year for companies with
25 or fewer employees.[30]

According to the City's 2018 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report,[31] the
main employers in the city are:

Due to its history as a center for semiconductor manufacturing, Mountain View
has seven sites on the Environmental Protection Agency's Final National
Priorities List (NPL), a list of hazardous waste sites in the United States
eligible for long-term remedial action financed under the federal Superfund
program. The sites were formerly used by companies including Fairchild
Semiconductor, Intel, Raytheon, Spectra-Physics, Jasco Chemical, GTE and
Teledyne. These seven sites make up a portion of the 22 NPL sites in Santa
Clara County, which are included in the total of 94 sites in California.[32]

The 2010 United States Census[14] reported that Mountain View had a population
of 74,066. The population density was 6,034.8 people per square mile
(2,330.0/km2).[14] The census reported that 73,801 people (99.6% of the
population) lived in households, 145 (0.2%) lived in non-institutionalized
group quarters, and 120 (0.2%) were institutionalized.[14] There were 31,957
households, out of which 8,731 (27.3%) had children under the age of 18 living
in them, 13,806 (43.2%) were opposite-sex married couples living together,
2,456 (7.7%) had a female householder with no husband present, 1,253 (3.9%)
had a male householder with no wife present. There were 1,928 (6.0%) unmarried
opposite-sex partnerships, and 280 (0.9%) same-sex married couples or
partnerships. 10,961 households (34.3%) were made up of individuals and 2,471
(7.7%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average
household size was 2.31. There were 17,515 families (54.8% of all households);
the average family size was 3.01.[14] The population was spread out with
14,594 people (19.7%) under the age of 18, 5,401 people (7.3%) aged 18 to 24,
28,577 people (38.6%) aged 25 to 44, 17,647 people (23.8%) aged 45 to 64, and
7,846 people (10.6%) who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was
35.9 years. For every 100 females, there were 103.6 males. For every 100
females age 18 and over, there were 103.5 males.[14] There were 33,881 housing
units at an average density of 2,760.6 per square mile (1,065.9/km2), of which
13,332 (41.7%) were owner-occupied, and 18,625 (58.3%) were occupied by
renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.3%; the rental vacancy rate was
4.4%. 32,002 people (43.2% of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing
units and 41,799 people (56.4%) lived in rental housing units.[14]

As of 2013, according to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, Mountain View had
an unemployment rate of 5%.[34] It had a female population of 49.1 percent and
a male population of 50.9 percent. Persons under five were 7.1 percent,
persons under 18 were 19.7 percent, and persons age 65 and older were 10.6
percent.[34] In 2016, 8.7 percent of people in Mountain View were living below
the poverty line. Of the citizens over the age of sixteen, 64.3 percent were
employed in the labor force, while 26.2 percent were not.[35]

According to the Santa Clara County Homeless Census and Survey, the number of
homeless individuals in Mountain View increased 51% from 2015 to 2017, with
276 homeless individuals in 2015, and 416 in 2017.[36] In August 2017, the
_Mercury News_ reported that Mountain View had seen RVs and recreational
vehicles become the choice of residence for many working poor in the city. The
city's communications coordinator called it a "new" situation, noting that
many of the residents living in RVs were working up to three jobs, and that
affordable housing was hard to come by in the city.[36] In December 2017,
Google received approval to build nearly 10,000 new units of housing near its
future campus in the city.[22]

As of the census[39] of 2000, there were 70,708 people, 31,242 households, and
15,902 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,263.7/km2
(5,861.4/mi2). There were 32,432 housing units at an average density of
1,038.3/km2 (2,688.5/mi2). The racial makeup of the city was 63.77% White,
20.67% Asian, 18.26% Hispanic or Latino (of any race), 2.53% African American,
0.39% Native American, 0.26% Pacific Islander, 8.32% from other races, and
4.07% from two or more races.[39]

There were 31,242 households out of which 23.3% had children under the age of
18 living with them, 40.0% were married couples living together, 7.3% had a
female householder with no husband present, and 49.1% were non-families. 35.6%
of all households were made up of individuals and 7.0% had someone living
alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.25
and the average family size was 2.97.[39]

In the city, the population was spread out with 18.0% under the age of 18,
8.3% from 18 to 24, 43.4% from 25 to 44, 19.8% from 45 to 64, and 10.5% who
were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 35 years. For every 100
females, there were 106.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there
were 106.9 males.[39]

According to a 2007 estimate the median income for a household in the city was
$82,648, and the median income for a family was $105,079.[40] Males had a
median income of $64,585 versus $44,358 for females. The per capita income for
the city was $39,693. About 3.6% of families and 6.8% of the population were
below the poverty line, including 7.2% of those under age 18 and 5.9% of those
age 65 or over.

Mountain View has a council-manager government system. An executive city
manager is in charge of several departments, while the city council, supported
by several boards, commissions, and committees, is the legislature responsible
for the ordinances of the city code. The executive in turn enforces the code
and promulgates administrative regulations to execute it. The city clerk and
attorney perform supporting roles. The Community Development Department is the
agency responsible for planning and zoning.[41]

In the state legislature, Mountain View is in the 13th Senate District,
represented by Democrat Jerry Hill, and in the 24th Assembly District,
represented by Democrat Marc Berman.[42] In the United States House of
Representatives, Mountain View is in California's 18th congressional district,
represented by Democrat Anna Eshoo.[43]

Mountain View is represented by a 7-member council elected at-large. The mayor
is a council member appointed by their peers each year.[44]

The Mountain View Fire Department maintains five stations, and is responsible
for fire protection and emergency medical services.[45][46][47]

The Mountain View Police Department maintains patrol, traffic enforcement,
detective, K9 and SWAT services for the city,[48][49][50] and participates in
several task forces,[51] including the Regional Allied Computer Crime Task
Force (REACT) and the Regional Auto Theft Task Force (RAATF).[ _citation
needed_ ]

Mountain View is served by a mix of public and private schools.

The public elementary (Bubb, Castro, Huff, Landels, Mistral, Monta Loma,
Stevenson, and Theuerkauf) and middle schools (Crittenden and Graham) are
governed by the Mountain View-Whisman School District.[52] Springer
Elementary, although located within the borders of Mountain View, is governed
by the Los Altos School District. The public high schools are governed by the
Mountain View-Los Altos Union High School District and consist of Alta Vista
High School, Mountain View High School, and Los Altos High School.[53]
Mountain View High and Los Altos High each contain approximately 50% Los Altos
residents and 50% Mountain View residents. Some Mountain View residents attend
Almond Elementary and Egan Junior High in the Los Altos School District.

Mountain View taxed a large portion of its most valuable commercial and
industrial properties in the Shoreline Regional Park Community at very low
relative levels, and until the creation of a joint-powers agreement (JPA) in
2006, none of those property taxes reached the local schools. After the
creation of the JPA, the Shoreline Regional Park Community shared less than $1
million per year with the elementary and high school districts.[54][55]

A citizen-supported parcel tax, largely aimed at reducing class sizes, was
recently renewed with an overwhelming positive vote.[56] The current ratio of
students to full-time-equivalent teachers in the Mountain View public
elementary schools is 20.4 to one.[57]

Notable private schools in Mountain View include: Khan Lab School, a
laboratory school associated with Khan Academy; Saint Francis High School, a
Roman Catholic secondary school; German International School of Silicon Valley
(GISSV), a PK-12 German-English bilingual international school; and Yew Chung
International School of Silicon Valley, a PK-8 Chinese-English bilingual
international school.

Mountain View has one central public library, the Mountain View Public
Library, which has video, music, books, and access to the Internet. During the
2006-2007 fiscal year, 810,589 customers visited the library. Circulation was
more than 1.4 million, 105,870 reference and information questions were
answered, 36,693 children listened to stories and participated in children's
programs. The library hosts the Mountain View Reads Together program. Also
during that time, 27,342 new books and media items were added to the
collection, which includes holdings of 300,000, including 210,000 books and
423 periodical subscriptions. The library also provides outreach services
through the bookmobile and S.O.S. volunteer program to those in Mountain View,
who are unable to come to the main branch. The building was built in 1997. The
second floor of the library has a special collection in a room devoted to the
history of Mountain View, which features a portrait of Crisanto Castro, for
whom the major downtown thoroughfare is named.[58] Outside the library one can
find a piece of the torn-down Berlin Wall on display.[59]

Going forward from July 2019, the library eliminated the practice of charging
late fees for overdue books.[60]

The Downtown Mountain View Station is the transit center for the city,
connecting the public commuter rail, light rail, bus, and private shuttle
systems. Mountain View is served by the Caltrain commuter rail system, which
runs from San Francisco to Gilroy. The two Caltrain stations in the city are
Downtown Mountain View Station and San Antonio Station. The city is also
served by the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA), which
operates various bus lines and the light rail system. There are a total of
four stations in the city on the Mountain ViewâWinchester VTA light rail line,
with Downtown Mountain View Station serving as the northern terminus, while
the other three stations are Whisman, Middlefield, and Bayshore/NASA. Many
large local employers (including Google, Microsoft, Apple Inc., and NASA Ames
Research Center) operate employee shuttles that stop at the Downtown Mountain
View Station. There is also a free community shuttle bus that serves 50 stops
within Mountain View.[61]

The nearest major airports are San Jose International Airport (SJC), San
Francisco International Airport (SFO), and Oakland International Airport
(OAK), in that order. Moffett Federal Airfield is located just north of
Mountain View, but it is restricted to government, military, and private use.
The nearest general aviation airport is the Palo Alto Airport of Santa Clara
County.

Power in the city is operated by Pacific Gas and Electric Company.[62]

On August 16, 2006, after over a year of test deployments, Google announced
that its implementation of free IEEE 802.11g wireless service for all of the
City was fully operational.[63]

On February 19, 2014, the City of Mountain View and Google announced a new
connectivity plan for residents, to replace the existing system. Service will
be available along the downtown corridor of Mountain View, primarily on Castro
Street. Other areas to be covered include Rengstorff Park, the Mountain View
Public Library, Senior, Community, and Teen Centers.[64]

Mountain View has a pedestrian-friendly downtown centered on Castro Street.
The downtown area consists of the seven blocks of Castro Street from the
Downtown Mountain View Station transit center in the north to the intersection
with El Camino Real in the south. The transit center links the Caltrain
commuter rail and Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority (VTA) light rail
and bus systems.

Four blocks with a concentration of restaurants, cafes, and shops extend south
from the downtown station. Chez TJ, one of the few restaurants rated by the
Michelin Guide in the Bay Area, is located a block from Castro Street on Villa
Street. Tied House, located next door, was one of the first brewpubs in the
Bay Area, and is a popular stop in downtown.

The core of downtown is the plaza shared by City Hall, the Mountain View
Center for the Performing Arts (MVCPA) and the Mountain View Public Library.
The plaza is used for many community gatherings and events, and features a
collection of public art. Peninsula Youth Theatre and TheatreWorks are among
the home companies of the MVCPA.[65] The City Hall and MVCPA complex, designed
by William Turnbull of San Francisco, opened in 1991.[66] Behind those
buildings is Pioneer Park, formerly the site of Mountain View's first
cemetery.[67]

The Mountain View Police Department is located two blocks away from Castro
Street on Villa Street.[68]

Since 1971, the city has held the annual Mountain View Art & Wine Festival on
Castro Street by closing down the street to traffic for two days. There is a
farmers' market in the Caltrain parking lot every Sunday morning. Every
summer, once a month, the city celebrates Thursday Night Live by closing off
Castro street to cars and providing live music events and car shows on Castro
Street.

The entire length of El Camino in Mountain View is a low-density commercial
area.[ _citation needed_ ]

The largest park in the city is Shoreline Park, which was built on a landfill
and runs along the Bay north of U.S. Route 101. It includes Shoreline
Amphitheatre, Shoreline Golf Course, as well as Rengstorff House, which is
listed in the National Register of Historic Places. On the north side, facing
the Bay, the park includes tidal ponds and mudflats, accessible via pedestrian
and bicycle paths. The San Francisco Bay Trail runs along Shoreline Park.

Stevens Creek runs through Mountain View from the south and empties into the
Bay in Shoreline Park. A paved pedestrian and bicycle path, the Stevens Creek
Trail, runs alongside the creek for nearly its entire distance in Mountain
View.

Other parks include:

The Computer History Museum is home to the largest and most significant
collection of computing artifacts in the world.

Moffett Field is a joint civil-military federal airfield located between
northern Mountain View and northern Sunnyvale, California. It is home to NASA
Ames Research Center and the Air National Guard. Its hangars for blimps and
rigid airships (now mostly vacant) make unique landmarks for motorists on
Highway 101.

The Historic Adobe Building, a small events center on Moffett Boulevard, is
listed in the National Register of Historic Places.

St. Joseph Parish was founded in 1905, and survived the 1906 San Francisco
earthquake, only to burn down in 1928.[70] St. Joseph's Seminary operated here
between 1924 and 1991.[71] The current St. Joseph church building was built in
1929.[70]

The Mountain View Sister City Affiliation was incorporated in 1974 as an
independent non-profit governed by a Board of Directors. Mountain View is
affiliated with the cities of

The rock garden in Pioneer Park was a gift from the sister city of Iwata to
celebrate the completion of Mountain View's City Hall building.[72] [73]

