**MSN** (stylized in all lowercase) is a web portal and related collection of
Internet services and apps for Windows and mobile devices, provided by
Microsoft and launched on August 24, 1995, the same release date as Windows
95.[3]

The Microsoft Network was initially a subscription-based dial-up online
service that later became an Internet service provider named MSN Dial-up. At
the same time, the company launched a new web portal named **Microsoft
Internet Start** and set it as the first default home page of Internet
Explorer, its web browser. In 1998, Microsoft renamed and moved this web
portal to the domain name **www.msn.com** , where it has remained.[4]

In addition to its original MSN Dial-up service, Microsoft has used the 'MSN'
brand name for a wide variety of products and services over the years, notably
Hotmail (later Outlook.com), Messenger (which was once synonymous with 'MSN'
in Internet slang and has now been replaced by Skype), and its web search
engine, which is now Bing, and several other rebranded and discontinued
services.

The current website and suite of apps offered by MSN was first introduced by
Microsoft in 2014 as part of a complete redesign and relaunch.[5] MSN is based
in the United States and offers international versions of its portal for
dozens of countries around the world.[6]

From 1995 to 1998, the MSN.com domain was used by Microsoft primarily to
promote MSN as an online service and Internet service provider. At the time,
MSN.com also offered a custom start page and an Internet tutorial, but
Microsoft's major web portal was known as 'Microsoft Internet Start,' located
at home.microsoft.com.

Internet Start served as the default home page for Internet Explorer and
offered basic information such as news, weather, sports, stocks, entertainment
reports, links to other websites on the Internet, articles by Microsoft staff
members, and software updates for Windows. Microsoft's original news website,
msnbc.com (now NBCNews.com), which launched in 1996, was also tied closely to
the Internet Start portal.

In 1998, the largely underutilized 'MSN.com' domain name was combined with
Microsoft Internet Start and reinvented as both a web portal and as the brand
for a family of sites produced inside Microsoft's Interactive Media Group. The
new website put MSN in direct competition with sites such as Yahoo!, Excite
and Go Network. Because the new format opened up MSN's content to the world
for free, the Internet service provider and subscription service was renamed
MSN Internet Access at that time. (That service eventually became known as MSN
Dial-up.)[4]

The relaunched MSN.com contained a whole family of sites, including original
content, channels that were carried over from 'web shows' that were part of
Microsoft's MSN 2.0 experiment with its Internet service provider in 1996â€“97,
and new features that were rapidly added. MSN.com became the successor to the
default Internet Explorer start page, as all of the previous 'Microsoft
Internet Start' website was merged with MSN.com.[4]

Some of the original websites that Microsoft launched during that era remain
active in some form today. Microsoft Investor, a business news and investments
service that was once produced in conjunction with CNBC, is now MSN
Money;[7][8][9] CarPoint, an automobile comparison and shopping service, is
now MSN Autos; and the Internet Gaming Zone, a website offering online casual
games, is now MSN Games. Other websites since divested by Microsoft include
the travel website Expedia, the online magazine Slate, and the local event and
city search website Sidewalk.com.

In the late 1990s, Microsoft collaborated with many other service providers,
as well as other Microsoft departments, to expand the range of MSN's services.
Some examples include MSN adCenter, MSN Shopping (affiliated with eBay,
PriceGrabber and Shopping.com), and the Encarta encyclopedia with various
levels of access to information.

Since then, MSN.com has remained a popular destination, launching many new
services and content sites. MSN's Hotmail and Messenger services were promoted
from the MSN.com portal, which provided a central place for all of MSN's
content. MSN Search (now Bing), a dedicated search engine, launched in 1999.
The single sign-in service for Microsoft's online services, Microsoft Passport
(now Microsoft account), also launched across all MSN services in 1999. The
MSN.com portal and related group of services under the 'MSN' umbrella remained
largely the same in the early 2000s.

The sports section of the MSN portal was ESPN.com from 2001 to 2004, and
FoxSports.com from 2004 to 2014.[12][13] MSN had an exclusive partnership with
msnbc.com for news content from 1996 until 2012, when Microsoft sold its
remaining stake in msnbc.com to NBCUniversal and the website was renamed
NBCNews.com. Since then, MSN has launched 'MSN News', an in-house news
operation.[14]

As of May 2005, MSN.com was the second most visited portal websites in the
United States with a share of 23.2 percent, behind Yahoo! which held a
majority.[15]

MSN released a preview of an updated home page and logo on November 3,
2009.[16] It was originally expected to be widely available to over 100
million U.S. customers by early 2010.[17][18] MSN rolled out the newer logo,
together with a redesign of the overall website, on December 25, 2009.[19][20]

In 2012, MSN announced on its blog that it would be unveiling a new version of
the MSN.com home page on October 26, exclusively for Windows 8, saying that
the new version would be "clean, simple, and built for touch."[21] Microsoft
said it would be more app-like due to the speed of Internet Explorer 10. More
new features included 'Flip Ahead', which allowed users to swipe from one
article to the next. MSN for Windows 8 also had new deals with the AP and
Reuters.[22]

Many of MSN's services were reorganized in 2005 and 2006 under a new brand
name that Microsoft championed at the time, Windows Live. This move was part
of Microsoft's strategy to improve its online offerings using the Windows
brand name. The company also overhauled its online software and services due
to increasing competition from rivals such as Yahoo! and Google. The new name
was introduced one service at a time. The group of Windows Live services used
Web 2.0 technology to offer features and functionality through a web browser
that were traditionally only available through dedicated software programs.

Some of the MSN services affected by the rebranding included MSN Hotmail,
which became Windows Live Hotmail (now Outlook.com); MSN Messenger, which
became Windows Live Messenger (now integrated into Skype); MSN Search, which
became Live Search (now known as Bing); MSN Virtual Earth, which became Live
Search Maps (now Bing Maps); MSN Spaces, which became Windows Live Spaces; MSN
Alerts, which became Windows Live Alerts; and MSN Groups, which became Windows
Live Groups. Some other services, such as MSN Direct, remained a part of the
MSN family without transitioning to Windows Live.

Following the launch of Windows Live, the MSN brand took on a different focus.
MSN became primarily an online content provider of news, entertainment, and
common interest topics through its web portal, MSN.com, while Windows Live
provided most of Microsoft's online software and services. In 2012, Microsoft
began to phase out the Windows Live brand, referring to each service
separately by its individual brand name without any 'Windows' prefix or
association.[23]

Microsoft launched a completely rewritten and redesigned MSN website, making
use of the company's modern design language, on September 30, 2014.[5] The new
MSN portal features a new version of the logo that follows a style similar to
other current Microsoft products. The website no longer offers original
content, instead employing editors to repurpose existing content from partners
at popular and trusted organizations. Much of the existing content on MSN was
eliminated as the website was simplified into a new home page and categories,
some of which have corresponding apps:[24]

The top of the home page provides access to Microsoft services Bing,
Outlook.com, Skype, Office Online, OneNote, OneDrive, Bing Maps, and Groove
Music, as well as popular social media services Facebook and Twitter.[5]
Signing into MSN with a Microsoft account allows for personalized content to
appear and to be synchronized across devices on the website and in the
corresponding apps. The redesign of the website led to the closure of MSN's
longtime personalized home page service 'My MSN', which was made up of
customized RSS feeds, as the new website no longer supports user-specified RSS
content. However, it added some customizability, allowing each category on the
home page to be reordered or hidden.

With the 2014 relaunch, MSN now supports responsive design and eliminates the
need for a separate mobile website. The redesign of MSN proved positive and
helped increase traffic with an additional 10 million daily visitors after two
months.[26]

The **MSN** apps are a series of web-based cross-platform apps that primarily
provide users information from sources that publish to MSN.

Microsoft launched these apps along with the 2014 redesign of the MSN web
portal, rebranding many of the Bing apps that originally shipped with Windows
and Windows Phone. News, Weather, Sports, Money, and Travel first shipped with
Windows 8, while Health & Fitness and Food & Drink first appeared in Windows
8.1.[27][28] In December 2014, the apps became available across all the other
major mobile device platforms as well: iOS, Android, and Fire
OS.[29][30][31][32][33]

The apps allow users some, but not total, control of which sources provide
information. Each app has its own color code that is used on the live tile and
internally. Originally, each app brought a unified experience with the MSN
website and synchronized preferences across devices; for example, setting a
list of stocks to watch on MSN.com would show the same data on the MSN Money
app on all devices where the user was signed in with a Microsoft account. The
synchronization was dropped when the apps were rebuilt for Windows 10.

There are currently four apps in the suite: News, Weather, Sports, and
Money.[34] In July 2015, Microsoft announced the discontinuation of the Food &
Drink, Health & Fitness, and Travel apps on all platforms, and that they will
not be bundled with Windows 10; those three apps are no longer offered.[35]

After Microsoft's acquisition of Nokia's mobile phone division, Microsoft also
started bundling MSN services with its Nokia-branded feature phones, though
the only supported model was the Nokia 215.[36][37][38] In addition to these
apps, Microsoft developed a separate set of mobile apps specifically for MSN
China.

**Microsoft News** (previously named **MSN News** and **Bing News** ) is a
news aggregator and service that features the latest news headlines and
articles hand-picked by editors around the clock from trusted sources across
the web. The app includes sections for top stories, U.S., world, politics,
money, technology, entertainment, opinion, sports, 'weekend reads', crime, and
offbeat news. It allows users to set their own favorite topics and sources,
receive notifications of breaking news though alerts, filter preferred news
sources, and alter font sizes to make articles easier to read.[39]

Originally, News included an RSS feed, but that capability was removed;
Microsoft currently only allows users to subscribe to specified news
sources.[40] News uses the chaseable live tile feature introduced in the
Windows 10 Anniversary Update. If a user clicks on the News Start menu tile
when a particular story is shown, the user will see a link to that story at
the top of the app when it launches.[41]

**MSN Weather** (originally named **Bing Weather** ) shows weather from a
user's current location or any other location worldwide, and it allows users
to define their favorite places, which will synchronize back to the web portal
and across devices. Users can pin Weather tiles to the Start menu to see local
weather conditions from multiple locations at a glance. It also offers
satellite maps and has information regarding ski resorts.[42] The app receives
its weather conditions and forecasts from a variety of sources
internationally.[43] Weather uses weather conditions as the background, making
it the only app that does not have a light/dark switch in Windows 10. Weather
is not available for iOS; however, it comes preinstalled on the Nokia 215
phone from Microsoft Mobile that runs Series 30+; it is currently the only
feature phone to have the app built-in.[38]

**MSN Sports** (originally named **Bing Sports** ) displays various sports
scores and standings from hundreds of leagues around the world, as well as
aggregating sports-related articles and news headlines.[44][45][46][47] Sports
also allows the user to view slideshows and photo galleries, look up
information about individual players and fantasy leagues, and set and track
their favorite teams by selecting various topics from the hamburger
menu.[48][49] It also powers various predictive features within Microsoft's
Cortana virtual assistant.[50]

**MSN Money** (originally named **Bing Finance** ) allows users to set up
lists of stocks to watch, follow certain corporations and receive stock
updates, get the latest headlines regarding stock markets, view real-time
trading figures with a 30-minute delay, track their own personal finances,
calculate mortgages, get information on commodities and bonds, and convert
currency.[51][52][53]

**MSN Food & Drink** (originally named **Bing Food & Drink**) was a recipe app
that offers news related to food and drink, a personal shopping list that
synchronizes across devices and the web, and a wine encyclopedia that contains
information on over 1.5 million bottles of wine, over 3.3 million tasting
notes, and hundreds of cocktail recipes.[54] Users can control the app hands-
free, add their own recipes from physical cookbooks or personal recipes by
snapping a photo, add notes to recipes, and sort the recipes into
collections.[55] The app also collects information from famous chefs and lists
them according to their style of cuisine.[56]

**MSN Health & Fitness** (originally named **Bing Health & Fitness**) allowed
users to track their intake of calories, look up nutritional information for
hundreds of thousands of different foods, use a built-in GPS tracker, view
step-by-step workouts and exercises with images and videos, check symptoms for
various health conditions, and synchronize their health data to third-party
devices such as activity trackers.[57][58][59] MSN Health & Fitness formerly
connected data with the Microsoft HealthVault, but it started using a
Microsoft account with MSN's own cloud service to synchronize data when it was
rebranded from Bing to MSN.[60][61] The app is not related in any way to
Microsoft's Xbox Fitness or Microsoft Health (the companion app for the
Microsoft Band), despite being similar in function.[62]

**MSN Travel** (originally named **Bing Travel** ) was a travel search engine
that allows users to book hotels and flights, aggregates travel-related
headlines, and offers detailed information about thousands of travel
destinations.[63] Data in the app is powered by various travel websites,
including Expedia, formerly owned by Microsoft.[64] Other features include
finding information on local restaurants, viewing pictures (including
panoramas) and historical data about destinations, and reading reviews by
previous travelers.[65] If the user is signed in, Cortana can track flights
and get hotel information through the app.[66] MSN Travel was the only app in
the suite that was exclusive to Windows. The app was discontinued in September
2015 but can still be accessed via the web.[67]

Previously, Microsoft had acquired _Farecast_ in 2008, a website in the
computer reservations system industry that offered predictions regarding the
best time to purchase airline tickets.[68] Farecast was founded in 2003 and
collected over 175 billion airfare observations by 2007.[69] Farecast's team
of data miners used these airfare observations to build algorithms to predict
future airfare price movements.[70] Microsoft integrated it as part of its
Live Search group of tools in May 2008 as _Live Search Farecast_ ; Microsoft
rebranded it as _Bing Travel_ on June 3, 2009, as part of its efforts to
create a new search identity.[71] In 2009, there were allegations that Bing
Travel had copied its layouts from Kayak.com; Microsoft denied the
allegations.[72] By January 2013, Bing Travel results were powered by
Kayak.com. As of January 2014, the fare prediction feature had been removed.
As of May 2015, Microsoft rebranded the service to _MSN Travel_.[73] In August
2015, MSN Travel flight search pages changed from being powered by Kayak.com
to its competitor Skyscanner.

Microsoft first offered content from its MSN web portal on mobile devices in
the early 2000s, through a service it called _Pocket MSN_ (in line with its
Pocket PC products of the era) and later renamed _MSN Mobile_. The original
MSN Mobile software was preloaded on many cell phones and PDAs, and usually
provided access to legacy MSN services like blogs (MSN Spaces), email
(Hotmail), instant messaging (MSN Messenger), and web search (now called
Bing). Some wireless carriers charged a premium to access it.[ _citation
needed_ ] As many former MSN properties were spun off to Bing, Windows Live,
and other successors in late 2000s, the Microsoft Mobile Services division
took over the development of mobile apps related to those services.

In the meantime, Microsoft's MSN apps took on a more content-related focus, as
did the web portal itself. Previous versions of MSN apps that were bundled
with Windows Mobile and early versions of Windows Phone,[74] as well as MSN
apps for Android and iOS devices in the early 2010s, were primarily
repositories for news articles found on MSN.com.[75][76][77] Other earlier MSN
mobile apps included versions of MSN Weather and MSN Money for Windows Mobile
6.5,[78][79][80] and 'MSN Money Stocks' and a men's magazine called 'MSN OnIt'
for Windows Phone 7.[81][82]

Microsoft's world headquarters is in the United States, so the main MSN
website is based there. However, MSN has offered various international
versions of its portal since its inception in 1995 for dozens of countries
around the world.[6] A list of international MSN affiliates is available at
MSN Worldwide.[83]

Following the redesign and relaunch of the MSN web portal in 2014, most
international MSN websites share the same layout as the U.S. website and are
largely indistinguishable from it, aside from their content. There were two
exceptions: ninemsn, a longtime partnership between Microsoft and the Nine
Network in Australia that launched in 1997 (Microsoft sold its stake in the
venture and 2013 and ended its co-branding with Nine in 2016);[84] and MSN
China, an entirely customized version of MSN for China (Microsoft discontinued
the portal in 2016, replacing it with a page that links to a number of other
Chinese websites).[85]

