**Nadia Murad Basee Taha** (Arabic: نادية مراد باسي طه‎; born 1993)[1] is an
Iraqi Yazidi[2][3] human rights activist who lives in Germany.[3] In 2014, she
was kidnapped from her hometown Kocho and held by the Islamic State for three
months.[4]

Murad is the founder of Nadia's Initiative, an organization dedicated to
"helping women and children victimized by genocide, mass atrocities, and human
trafficking to heal and rebuild their lives and communities".[5]

In 2018, she and Denis Mukwege were jointly awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for
"their efforts to end the use of sexual violence as a weapon of war and armed
conflict".[6] She is the first Iraqi and Yazidi to be awarded a Nobel
Prize.[7]

Murad was born in the village of Kocho in Sinjar District, Iraq.[8] Her
family, of the Yazidi minority, were farmers.[9] At the age of 19, Murad was a
student living in the village of Kocho in Sinjar, northern Iraq when Islamic
State fighters rounded up the Yazidi community in the village, killing 600
people – including six of Nadia's brothers and stepbrothers – and taking the
younger women and girls into slavery. That year, Murad was one of more than
6,700 Yazidi women and girls taken prisoner by Islamic State in Iraq.[10] She
was captured on 15 August 2014.[11] She was held as a slave in the city of
Mosul, where she was beaten, burned with cigarettes, and raped. She
successfully escaped after her captor left the house unlocked.[11] Murad was
taken in by a neighbouring family, who were able to smuggle her out of the
Islamic State controlled area, allowing her to make her way to a refugee camp
in Duhok, northern Iraq.[12] She was out of ISIS territory on early
September[13] or in November 2014.[11]

In February 2015, she gave her first testimony to reporters of the Belgian
daily newspaper _La Libre Belgique_ while she was staying in the Rwanga camp,
living in a converted shipping container.[13] In 2015, she was one of 1,000
women and children to benefit from a refugee programme of the Government of
Baden-Württemberg, (Germany), which became her new home.[14][15]

On 16 December 2015, Murad spoke to the United Nations Security Council about
human trafficking and conflict. This was the first time the Council was ever
briefed on human trafficking.[9][16] As part of her role as an ambassador,
Murad will participate in global and local advocacy initiatives to bring
awareness of human trafficking and refugees.[17] Murad has reached out to
refugee and survivor communities, listening to testimonies of victims of
trafficking and genocide.[18]

In September 2016, Attorney Amal Clooney spoke before the United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to discuss the decision that she had made in
June 2016[19] to represent Murad as a client in legal action against ISIL
commanders.[17][18][20] Clooney characterized the genocide, rape, and
trafficking by ISIL as a "bureaucracy of evil on an industrial scale",
describing it as a slave market existing online, on Facebook and in the
Mideast that is still active today.[10] Murad has received serious threats to
her safety as a result of her work.[9]

In September 2016, Murad announced Nadia's Initiative at an event hosted by
Tina Brown in New York City. The initiative intends to provide advocacy and
assistance to victims of genocide.[21] That same month, she was named the
first Goodwill Ambassador for the Dignity of Survivors of Human trafficking of
the United Nations (UNODC).[22]

On 3 May 2017, Murad met Pope Francis and Archbishop Gallagher in the Vatican
City. During the meeting, she "asked for helping Yazidis who are still in ISIS
captivity, acknowledged the Vatican support for minorities, discussed the
scope for an autonomous region for minorities in Iraq, highlighted the current
situation and challenges facing religious minorities in Iraq and Syria
particularly the victims and internally displaced people as well as
immigrants".[23]

Murad's memoir, _The Last Girl: My Story of Captivity, and My Fight Against
the Islamic State_ , was published by Crown Publishing Group on 7 November
2017.[24][25]

In 2018, director Alexandria Bombach produced a documentary film called _On
Her Shoulders_ that featured Murad's life story and activism.[26][27][28]

In 2019, Murad addressed the second annual Ministerial to Advance Religious
Freedom where she spoke about her story and the ongoing challenges faced by
Yazidis nearly five years after the 3 August 2014 attacks and laid out a
"five-point plan of action" to address the challenges they face in
Iraq.[29][30] Murad was included among a delegation of survivors of religious
persecution from around the world whose stories were highlighted at the
summit.[31] As part of the delegation, on 17 July 2019, Murad met with
President Donald Trump in the Oval Office and shared her personal story of
having lost her family members, including her mom and six brothers, and
pleaded with him to do something.[32]

In August 2018, Murad became engaged to fellow Yazidi human rights activist
Abid Shamdeen.[33]

