**Natasha Henstridge** (born August 15, 1974) is a Canadian actress and model.
In 1995, she came to prominence with her debut role in the science-fiction
thriller _Species_ , followed by _Species II_ and _Species III_. Other notable
film and television roles include _The Whole Nine Yards_ , _The Whole Ten
Yards_ , _Ghosts of Mars_ , _She Spies_ , _Eli Stone_ , and _Would Be Kings_ ,
for which she won the Gemini Award for best actress.

Henstridge was born in Springdale, Newfoundland and Labrador on August 15,
1974, the daughter of Helen Henstridge, a homemaker, and Brian Henstridge, a
construction manager and business owner.[1][2] She was raised in Fort
McMurray, Alberta, with her younger brother, Shane.

At age 14, Henstridge entered the Casablanca Modeling Agency's Look of the
Year contest and was chosen first runner-up. The following year, she went to
Paris to pursue her modeling ambitions. At age 15, she was featured on her
first magazine cover, the French edition of _Cosmopolitan_. Several more
magazine covers followed and Henstridge went on to do television commercials
for products such as Olay, Old Spice and Lady Stetson. With her modeling
career established, Henstridge started doing commercials and decided she
preferred acting.[3]

In her film debut _Species_ (1995), Henstridge played Sil, a genetically
engineered alien/human hybrid created from a message received by SETI, who
breaks free from the captivity of a laboratory. Pursued by a team of experts
who band together to stop her before she reproduces, Sil embarks on a killing
spree while also discovering her powerful instinct to mate.[3] _Species_ was
an instant hit, making US$113 million at the box office.[4] Notable for its
sexual content, the film won Henstridge the MTV Movie Award for Best Kiss for
a scene in which her character, while kissing an aggressive would-be suitor,
impales his head with her tongue. In 1998, she played Eve, a more ambiguous
genetic duplicate of Sil, in _Species II_ , which was a failure at the box
office. Between _Species_ films, Henstridge starred in two low budget action
films in 1996, _Adrenalin: Fear the Rush_ with Christopher Lambert, and
_Maximum Risk_ opposite Jean-Claude Van Damme.[3]

A few smaller independent movies followed, including _Bela Donna_ and _Dog
Park_ , with varied box office returns. Henstridge starred in the film _The
Whole Nine Yards_ (2000) and its sequel _The Whole Ten Yards_ (2004). Despite
having some reservations about the science fiction genre, she signed up for
John Carpenter's _Ghosts of Mars_ (2001) in the lead role of Lieutenant
Melanie Ballard. The film was not well received, with a 20% rating on Rotten
Tomatoes.[5] In 2004, she briefly appeared as Eve in _Species III_.

In 2007, Henstridge was a festival judge at the first annual Noor Iranian Film
Festival.

Henstridge has played a number of roles on television, for example in
_Caracara_ and _The Outer Limits_. From 2005 to 2006, she had a recurring role
as the Speaker's Chief of Staff on the ABC drama _Commander in Chief_ , which
starred Geena Davis as a fictional female U.S. president. She also hosted
_Mostly True Stories: Urban Legends Revealed_ on TLC, a show about urban
legends. She guest-starred in the _South Park_ first-season episode "Tom's
Rhinoplasty" as a substitute teacher, and was credited as "the chick from
_Species_ ".

Henstridge was working on the television series _She Spies_ , prior to its
cancellation. She has also completed a television movie for the Lifetime
channel titled _Widow on the Hill_. In 2006, she filmed the CTV original
miniseries _Would Be Kings_ in Hamilton, Ontario,[6] for which she won a
Gemini Award.[7] She also starred in the expansion set to the video game
_Command and Conquer 3: Tiberium Wars_ , entitled _Kane's Wrath_.[8]

In 2008, Henstridge played a role on the ABC comedy-drama series _Eli Stone_.
She has also been involved with two other productions, joining the cast of
Dave Rodriguez's _Anytown_ , an indie drama that examines a racist high school
attack and its aftermath. She has also been involved with the production of
_Should've Been Romeo_ from American Independent Pictures.

In 2009, Henstridge did a guest spot on _The Tonight Show_ with Conan O'Brien.
During this, she demonstrated a Newfoundland custom called "Screeching In"
which involved getting O'Brien to drink Newfoundland Screech rum and kiss a
large fish.[9]

In 2011, she appeared on the season 9 finale and season 10 premiere of _CSI:
Miami_ as Renee Locklear. She then starred in the CW television series _The
Secret Circle_ as Dawn Chamberlain.

Henstridge married American actor Damian Chapa in 1995 and they divorced in
1996. She dated American actor Liam Waite from 1996 to 2004, and they have two
sons together: Tristan River (born October 1998) and Asher Sky (born September
2001).[10] She began a relationship with Scottish singer Darius Campbell in
2004.[11] They became engaged but broke it off in early 2010,[12] then later
married on Valentine's Day 2011.[13] They filed for divorce in July
2013.[14][15] The divorce was finalized in February 2018.[16]

In November 2017, during the height of the #MeToo movement, Henstridge joined
six other actresses in accusing director Brett Ratner of sexual assault and
harassment; she maintains that he forced her to perform oral sex on him in the
early 1990s.[17]

