The **National Spherical Torus Experiment** ( **NSTX** ) is a magnetic fusion
device based on the _spherical tokamak_ concept. It was constructed by the
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) in collaboration with the Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, Columbia University, and the University of Washington at
Seattle.

The spherical tokamak (ST) is an offshoot of the conventional tokamak design.
Proponents claim that it has a number of practical advantages over these
devices, some of them dramatic. For this reason the ST has seen considerable
interest since it was proposed in the late 1980s. However, development remains
effectively one generation behind mainline efforts such as JET. Other major
experiments in the field include the pioneering START and MAST at Culham in
the UK.

NSTX studies the physics principles of spherically shaped plasmasâ€”hot ionized
gases in which nuclear fusion will occur under the appropriate conditions of
temperature and density, which are produced by confinement in a magnetic
field.

First plasma was obtained on NSTX on Friday, February 12, 1999 at 6:06 p.m.

Magnetic fusion experiments use plasmas composed of one or more hydrogen
isotopes. For example, in 1994, PPPL's Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor (TFTR)
produced a world-record 10.7 megawatts of fusion power from a plasma composed
of equal parts of deuterium and tritium, a fuel mix likely to be used in
commercial fusion power reactors. NSTX was a "proof of principle" experiment
and therefore employed deuterium plasmas only. If successful it was to be
followed by similar devices, eventually including a demonstration power
reactor (e.g. ITER), burning deuterium-tritium fuel.

NSTX produced a spherical plasma with a hole through its center (a "cored
apple" profile; see MAST), different from the doughnut-shaped (toroidal)
plasmas of conventional tokamaks. The low aspect ratio _A_ (that is, an _R_ /
_a_ of 1.31, with the major radius _R_ of 0.85 m and the minor radius _a_ of
0.65 m) experimental NSTX device had several advantages including plasma
stability through improved confinement. Design challenges include the toroidal
and poloidal field coils, vacuum vessels and plasma-facing components. This
plasma configuration can confine a higher pressure plasma than a doughnut
tokamak of high aspect ratio for a given, confinement magnetic field strength.
Since the amount of fusion power produced is proportional to the square of the
plasma pressure, the use of spherically shaped plasmas could allow the
development of smaller, more economical and more stable fusion reactors.
NSTX's attractiveness may be further enhanced by its ability to trap a high
"bootstrap" electric current. This self-driven internal plasma current would
reduce the power requirements of externally driven plasma currents required to
heat and confine the plasma.

The NSTX-U (Upgrade) was completed in 2015. It doubles the toroidal field (to
1 Tesla), plasma current (to 2 MA) and heating power. It increases the pulse
duration by a factor of five.[1] To achieve this the central stack (solenoid)
was widened.[2] [3]

The NSTX-U (Upgrade) was stopped in late 2016 just after its update due to a
particular dysfunction of its poloidal coils. The NSTX had been shut down
since 2012 and only returned for 10 weeks at the end of 2016 just after it was
updated. The origin of this failure is partly attributed to a non-compliance
of the chilled copper winding, the manufacture of which had been sub-treated.
After a diagnostic phase requiring the complete dismantling of the reactor and
coils, a restarting plan is adopted in March 2018. Reactivation of the reactor
is not planned until the end of 2020. [4] [5] [6]

