The **National High Magnetic Field Laboratory** ( **MagLab** ) is a facility
at Florida State University, the University of Florida, and Los Alamos
National Laboratory in New Mexico, that performs magnetic field research in
physics, biology, bioengineering, chemistry, geochemistry, biochemistry. It is
the only such facility in the US,[1] and is among nine[ _citation needed_ ]
worldwide. The lab is supported by the National Science Foundation and the
state of Florida, and works in collaboration with private industry.

Currently the lab holds a world record of possessing the world's strongest
magnet for nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy experiments. The 33-ton
series connected hybrid (SCH) magnet broke the record during a series of tests
conducted by MagLab engineers and scientists. The instrument reached its full
field of 36 Tesla on 15 November 2016.[2]

In 1989 Florida State University (FSU), Los Alamos National Laboratory, and
the University of Florida submitted a proposal to the National Science
Foundation (NSF) for a new national laboratory supporting interdisciplinary
research in high magnetic fields. The plan proposed a federal-state
partnership serving magnet-related research, science and technology education,
and partnering industry. The goal was to maintain the competitive position of
the US in magnet-related research and development. Following a peer-review
competition, the NSF approved the FSU-led consortium's proposal.

In a competing proposal to the NSF, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), with the University of Iowa, the University of Wisconsin–Madison,
Brookhaven National Laboratory, and Argonne National Laboratory, had suggested
improving the existing world-class Francis Bitter Magnet Laboratory at MIT. On
September 5, 1990, MIT researchers asked the 21 members of the National
Science Board (NSB) to "review and reconsider" its decision.[3] With $60
million at stake in the NSF grant, MIT stated it would phase out the Francis
Bitter Lab if it lost its appeal, the first of its kind in NSF history. The
request was turned down September 18, 1990.[4]

The laboratory's early years were spent establishing infrastructure, building
the facility, and recruiting faculty. The Tallahassee complex was dedicated on
October 1, 1994, to a large crowd, with keynote speaker Vice President Al
Gore.

The lab's mission, as set forth by the NSF, is: "To provide the highest
magnetic fields and necessary services for scientific research conducted by
users from a wide range of disciplines, including physics, chemistry,
materials science, engineering, biology and geology."

The lab focuses on four objectives:

The National MagLab promotes science education and supports science,
engineering, and science teachers through its Center for Integrating Research
and Learning. Programs include mentorships in an interdisciplinary learning
environment. Through the Magnet Academy,[5] the lab's website provides
educational content on electricity and magnetism.

The National MagLab also conducts monthly tours open to the public, and hosts
an annual open house with about 5,000 attendees. Special tour and outreach
opportunities are also available to local schools. In an interview on
Skepticality, Dr. Scott Hannahs said, "If you come by on the third Saturday in
February I believe we have an open house and we have Tesla coils shooting
sparks and we melt rocks in the geochemistry group and we measure the speed of
sound and we have lasers and potato launchers and we just have all sorts of
things showing little scientific principles and stuff. We get together and we
have about 5,000 people show up to come and tour a physics lab which is a
pretty amazing group of people."[6]

The Tallahassee laboratory at Florida State University is a 34,374 square
meter (370,000 sq ft.) complex and has approximately 300 faculty, staff,
graduate, and postdoctoral students. Its director is physicist Gregory Scott
Boebinger. Its chief scientist is Laura Greene.

The facility contains 14 resistive magnet cells connected to a 48 megawatt DC
power supply and 15,000 square feet (1,400 m2) of cooling equipment to remove
the heat generated by the magnets. The facility houses several magnets,
including a 45 Tesla hybrid magnet, which combines resistive and
superconducting magnets. The lab's 35 Tesla resistive magnet is the strongest
resistive magnet in the world, and the 25 Tesla Keck magnet has the highest
homogeneity of any resistive magnet.[7]

This program serves a broad user base in solution and solid state NMR
spectroscopy and MRI and diffusion measurements at high magnetic field
strengths. The lab develops technology, methodology, and applications at high
magnetic fields through both in-house and external user activities. An in-
house made 900 MHz (21.1 Tesla) NMR magnet has an ultra-wide bore measuring
105 mm (about 4 inches) in diameter, this superconducting magnet has the
highest field for MRI study of a living animals.[ _citation needed_ ]

The Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry program is
involved in instrument and technique development and applications of FT-ICR
mass spectrometry. Under the leadership of director Alan G. Marshall, the
program continuously develops techniques and instruments and applications of
FT-ICR mass spectrometry. The program has several instruments, including a
14.5 Tesla, 104 mm bore system.

The most common form of EMR is electron paramagnetic/spin resonance (EPR/ESR).
In EPR experiments, transitions are observed between the mS sublevels of an
electronic spin state S that are split by the applied magnetic field as well
as by the fine structure interactions and the electron-nuclear hyperfine
interactions. This technique has applications in chemistry, biochemistry,
biology, physics and materials research.

The Magnet Science and Technology division is charged with developing the
technology and expertise for magnet systems. These magnet projects include
building advanced magnet systems for the Tallahassee and Los Alamos sites,
working with industry to develop the technology to improve high-field magnet
manufacturing capabilities, and improving high field magnet systems through
research and development.

Also at the lab's FSU headquarters, the Applied Superconductivity Center
advances the science and technology of superconductivity for both the low
temperature niobium-based and the high temperature cuprate or MgB2-based
materials. The ASC pursues the superconductors for magnets for fusion, high
energy physics, MRI, and electric power transmission lines and transformers.

The in-house research program utilizes MagLab facilities to pursue high field
research in science and engineering, while advancing the lab’s user programs
through development of new techniques and equipment.

The condensed matter group scientists concentrate on various aspects of
condensed matter physics, including studies and experiments involving
magnetism, the quantum hall effect, quantum oscillations, high temperature
superconductivity, and heavy fermion systems.

The geochemistry research program is centered around the use of trace elements
and isotopes to understand the Earth processes and environment. The research
interests range from the chemical evolution of Earth and solar system through
time to local scale problems on the sources and transport of environmentally
significant substances. The studies conducted by the geochemistry division
concern terrestrial and extraterrestrial questions and involve land-based and
seagoing expeditions and spacecraft missions. Together with FSU's Chemistry
and Oceanography departments, Geochemistry has started a program in
Biogeochemical Dynamics.

Other programs include cryogenics, optical microscopy, quantum materials and
resonant ultrasound spectroscopy.

The lab also has a materials research team that researches new ways to make
high strength magnetic materials using more common and cheaper elements.[6]

Los Alamos National Laboratory in New Mexico hosts the Pulsed Field Facility,
which provides researchers with experimental capabilities for a wide range of
measurements in non-destructive pulsed fields to 60 Tesla. Pulsed field
magnets create high magnetic fields, but only for fractions of a second. A 100
Tesla multi-shot magnet is being jointly constructed by the Department of
Energy and the National Science Foundation. The laboratory is located at the
center of Los Alamos. In 1999-2000, the facility was relocated into a new
specially designed Experimental Hall to better accommodate user operations and
support. The program is the first and only high pulsed field user facility in
the United States.

The facility provides a wide variety of experimental capabilities to 60 Tesla,
using short and long pulse magnets. Power comes from a pulsed power
infrastructure which includes a 1.43 gigawatt motor generator and five
64-megawatt power supplies. The 1200-ton motor generator sits on a 4800-short
ton (4350 t) inertia block which rests on 60 springs to minimize earth tremors
and is the centerpiece of the Pulsed Field Laboratory.

The facility's magnets include a 60 Tesla long-pulse magnet that is the most
powerful controlled-pulse magnet in the world.

The University of Florida is home to user facilities in magnetic resonance
imaging or (MRI) with an ultra-low temperature, ultra-quiet environment for
experimental studies in the High B/T (high magnetic field/low temperature)
Facility. Facilities are also available for the fabrication and
characterization of nanostructures at a new nanoscale research facility
operated in conjunction with the university's Major Analytical and
Instrumentation Center.

The High B/T Facility is part of the Microkelvin Laboratory of the Physics
Department and conducts experiments in high magnetic fields up to 15.2 Teslas
and at temperatures as low as 0.4 mK simultaneously for studies of
magnetization, thermodynamic quantities, transport measurements, magnetic
resonance, viscosity, diffusion, and pressure.

The facility holds world records for high B/T in Bay 1 for short term low
field capabilities and world records for high field long time (> 1 week)
experiments.[ _citation needed_ ] The research group leads the world in
collective studies of quantum fluids and solids in terms of breadth and low
temperature techniques (thermometry, NMR, ultrasound, heat capacity, sample
cooling.)

The Advanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Spectroscopy program contains
facilities for the Mag Lab's NMR Program that complement the facilities at the
lab's headquarters in Tallahassee. The program is located at the University of
Florida's McKnight Brain Institute. Their instruments include a 600 MHz NMR
magnet with 1 mm triple-resonance, high-temperature superconducting probe,
which delivers the highest mass sensitivity of any probe at any frequency in
the world.[ _citation needed_ ]

Coordinates: 30°25′31″N 84°19′15″W﻿ / ﻿30.425215°N 84.320915°W﻿ / 30.425215;
-84.320915

