**NBC Sports Northwest** (originally **Comcast SportsNet Northwest** ) is an
American regional sports network that is owned by the NBC Sports Group unit of
NBCUniversal, and operates as an affiliate of NBC Sports Regional Networks.
The network broadcasts regional coverage of professional sports events
throughout the Pacific Northwest, focusing primarily on the NBA's Portland
Trail Blazers and college sports events involving the Oregon Ducks; the
network also covers other sports events involving teams within the
northwestern United States, including those featuring college and high school
teams.[1]

The network is available on cable providers throughout Oregon and Washington.
The network maintains business offices, master control operations and studio
facilities located in Portland, Oregon; NBC Sports Northwest maintains a
secondary studio in the Moda Center that is used for Trail Blazers game
coverage.

Comcast rebranded CSN Northwest as NBC Sports Northwest on October 2, 2017.[2]

After the Trail Blazers dismantled their pay-per-view network BlazerVision in
2001, the team reached a broadcast deal with FSN Northwest, where the team's
game telecasts aired until the 2006–07 season. Fox Sports Networks did not
renew its contract with the Blazers at the conclusion of the 2006–07 season;
as a result, Comcast formed a new regional sports network, Comcast SportsNet
Northwest, to assume the broadcast rights to the team.[3] The network launched
on November 1, 2007, coinciding with the start of the 2007–08 Trail Blazers
regular season.

With Comcast's acquisition of NBCUniversal in 2011, Comcast SportsNet was also
integrated into the new NBC Sports Group unit, culminating with the addition
of the peacock logo and an updated graphics package to mirror that of its
parent network. The updated graphics were implemented on CSN's live game
coverage and all studio shows; _SportsNet Central_ was an exception to this
initially, but would ultimately implement a new on-air look of its own and on
April 14, 2014, in conjunction with that change, the program switched to the
updated graphics package introduced three years earlier.

Comcast SportsNet Northwest became **CSN Northwest** in 2016.[4] On October 2,
2017, CSN Northwest was renamed as **NBC Sports Northwest** , as part of a
larger rebranding of the Comcast SportsNet networks under the NBC Sports
brand.[5]

NBC Sports Northwest holds the exclusive regional television rights to the
Portland Trail Blazers, carrying the majority of the NBA franchise's regular
season, pre-season and early-round playoff games; the network also produces
expanded pre-game and post-game analysis (under the _Rip City Live_ and
_Talking Ball_ banners), and carries select NBA Summer League games and season
team previews.[6] During the network's inaugural season in 2007–08, Comcast
SportsNet Northwest carried at least 55 Trail Blazers regular season games.
Combined with the Trail Blazers' over-the-air coverage, 81 of the team's
regular season games that year were shown on television, the largest number of
telecasts in the team's history. The new network aired 28 of the team's 36
home game telecasts in high definition.[3] All Trail Blazers telecasts are
produced in-house by the team, and some were previously syndicated to over-
the-air stations in the team's designated market region.[7]

On July 6, 2016, the team extended its contract through the 2020–2021 season
and made NBC Sports Northwest the exclusive broadcaster of all regional Trail
Blazers games beginning in the 2017–18 season.[7]

Since the 2008–09 season, due to the Seattle SuperSonics' relocation to
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, in 2008 to become the Oklahoma City Thunder, Trail
Blazers games are also available in the Seattle region.

The Oregon Sports Network (OSN) – a sports syndication service operated by the
University of Oregon to broadcast Oregon Ducks events – was seeking to expand
its coverage and availability, and negotiated a contract with Comcast
SportsNet Northwest around the time of its launch to air many of the
university's football and basketball games that were not scheduled to
broadcast on a national network or on FSN. In 2008, Comcast SportsNet
Northwest became the primary broadcaster of OSN-produced telecasts, with the
games being simulcast on Fox affiliate KLSR-TV (channel 34) in Eugene. Comcast
SportsNet Northwest did not carry any Ducks football games during the 2012
season. In 2015, it ran the weekly _Talking Ducks_ program.[6]

NBC Sports Northwest also provides coverage of a variety of other regional
sports events. The network broadcasts NHL games involving the Vancouver
Canucks, carrying 25 games per season that are simulcast from Sportsnet
Pacific. Through its relationships with other Comcast-owned channels, NBC
Sports Northwest also broadcasts 35 regular-season games from various other
NHL teams. In 2011, Comcast SportsNet Northwest announced that it would
provide a reduced schedule of NHL coverage focusing solely on the Vancouver
Canucks and San Jose Sharks; the network announced later that year that it
would no longer carry any Sharks telecasts. Additionally, the network also
carries select home games from the Portland Winterhawks Western Hockey League
franchise.[6]

In April 2009, Comcast SportsNet Northwest began carrying select regular
season games from the Tacoma Rainiers of the Pacific Coast League. The
telecasts audio simulcasts of play-by-play commentary called by Rainiers radio
announcer Mike Curto. On March 12, 2014, the network announced that it would
carry all but one home game from the Portland Thunder during the Arena
Football League team's inaugural season.[8]

The network produces _SportsNet Central_ , a daily morning news program
providing game highlights and sports headlines. The network will provide fans
with multimedia sports content online and through video on demand.[9] Along
with the network's Trail Blazers game coverage, the network also airs a number
of other NBA-related specials focused on the NBA Draft, NBA All-Star Game and
the NBA Playoffs.

NBC Sports Northwest also airs video simulcasts of three weekday sports radio
programs: it carries the Chuck Powell Show KJR (950 AM) talk program from
Seattle live each weekday from 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m., and _The FAN_ from
KFXX (1080 AM) in Portland from 3:00 to 6:00 p.m.[6]

As of September 2013[update], Comcast SportsNet Northwest is available on
Comcast[10] (in Oregon and Washington), Ashland TV, Beaver Creek Telcom,
BendBroadband,[11] Canby Telcom[12], Charter Communications (in Oregon and
Washington), Country Cablevision, Frontier Communications (in Oregon and
Washington), MINET (in Monmouth, Oregon),[13] Monroe Telephone, Reliance
Connects, Scio Cablevision, Frontier FiOS (in the Portland and Seattle
markets) and Wave Broadband.[14][15]

As of August 2013, the network is not available on satellite providers DirecTV
and Dish Network, which both maintain that Comcast has negotiated in bad faith
during carriage discussions engaged between the parties. Particularly, Comcast
demands the network be carried on more widely subscribed basic programming
tiers,[16] while contradictorily arguing that sports networks not owned by the
company be carried only on a dedicated sports tier.[17] The Trail Blazers are
said to be frustrated and disappointed with Comcast's conduct over their
contract with CSN Northwest in this regard.[18]

The Consumer Protection Committee of the Oregon House of Representatives held
a hearing on February 24, 2010 to attempt to arbitrate a carriage deal between
the network, DirecTV, Dish Network and Charter Communications. No
representatives for DirecTV, Dish Network or the Trail Blazers attended the
hearing.[19] On June 21, the Trail Blazers asked the Federal Communications
Commission to require Comcast to make the team's games available to competing
multichannel video programming distributors such as DirecTV and Dish
Network.[20]

Oregon-based cable provider Canby Telcom objected to a non-negotiable
subscribe fee increase that would have increased the network's annual
subscriber rate to over $32 in 2012; as a result, Canby announced plans to
stop carrying Comcast SportsNet Northwest.[21] Keith Galitz, president of
Canby Telcom, stated "That's just too steep an increase for us, and it's not
in line with inflation or normal escalation of prices in the industry."[21]
Canby Telcom has accused Comcast of raising rates way beyond the rate of
inflation and industry-wide increases.[21] Clear Creek Television, which
carried the Trail Blazers for 15 years, was rebuffed in its attempts to
negotiate the above-market rate Comcast was pushing for.[21]

Comcast sent some of its senior staff members to Oregon after a member of the
Sports Fan Coalition testified before the Oregon State Legislature on the
provider's denial of access to the network on DirecTV, Dish and other cable
providers. Brian Frederick, executive director of the advocacy group, stated
that "Comcast clearly sees the public perception of its treatment of sports
fans as a potential Achilles heel in efforts to acquire NBCU".[22] In a
November 7, 2010 article in _The Oregonian_ , Blazers chief executive officer
Larry Miller continued to express frustration about the lack of availability
for the team's CSN-televised games.[23]

**NBC Sports Northwest HD** is a 1080i high-definition simulcast feed of NBC
Sports Northwest. CSN Northwest broadcast 28 Portland Trail Blazers home games
in HD in the 2007–08 season;[3] that number of high-definition game telecasts
shown on the network increased to 32 for the 2008–09 season. Former Blazers
broadcaster Mike Barrett announced during the network's game telecast against
the Los Angeles Clippers on April 13, 2009, that CSN Northwest would broadcast
all Trail Blazers games in HD from then onward.

NBC Sports Northwest HD is available on Comcast throughout Oregon and
southwestern Washington; Comcast did not carry the high-definition feed in
most of the remainder of Washington State (specifically its systems in the
Seattle-Tacoma and Spokane markets) until early 2013, when it began to be
carried on Channel 617. NBC Sports Northwest HD is only available on Comcast's
digital preferred package in western and eastern Washington.

