**NBC Sports Philadelphia** is an American regional sports network owned by
the NBC Sports Group unit of NBCUniversal, which in turn is owned by locally
based cable television provider Comcast (and owns a controlling 75% interest),
and the Philadelphia Phillies (which owns the remaining 25%). It is the
flagship owned-and-operated outlet of NBC Sports Regional Networks. The
channel broadcasts regional coverage of professional sports teams in the
Philadelphia metropolitan area, as well as college sports events and original
sports-related news, discussion and entertainment programming.

NBC Sports Philadelphia is available on cable and fiber optic television
providers throughout southeastern Pennsylvania and southern New Jersey and
most of Delaware. The network maintains main studios and offices located
inside the Wells Fargo Center in Philadelphia's South Philadelphia district;
it also operates a small secondary studio inside Citizens Bank Park, which is
used sporadically during Major League Baseball season.

The network traces its history to March 19, 1996, when Comcast acquired a 66
percent stake in Spectacor, the parent company of the Philadelphia Flyers, The
Spectrum and the then-recently completed CoreStates Center, for $240 million
and the assumption of a collective $170 million in debt. Ed Snider, the
previous majority owner of Spectacor, stayed on as the managing partner and
chairman of the renamed Comcast Spectacor. On the day the deal closed, Comcast
Spectacor immediately purchased a 66% interest in the Philadelphia
76ers.[2][3]

Immediately after the purchase was announced, speculation arose as to whether
Comcast would let at least some of Spectacor's television contracts with
premium cable network PRISM and existing regional sports network SportsChannel
Philadelphia (both owned by Rainbow Media) run out, and create a sports
network of its own, displacing both existing networks from Comcast and other
cable providers in Southeastern Pennsylvania (Comcast, however, had reached a
ten-year agreement with Rainbow to continue carriage of PRISM and
SportsChannel, as well as the company's other networks in the fall of 1995);
buy the existing networks; or reach a complex deal with Rainbow to have both
networks retain the broadcast rights to the 76ers and Flyers.[4][5]

Within days of the purchase, Comcast indicated that was considering launching
a new RSN, and approached the Philadelphia Phillies about entering into a
broadcast deal.[2] PRISM and SportsChannel Philadelphia's joint contract to
carry most of the Flyers' NHL games was set to end that fall, while the
Phillies' contract ended after the 1997 season, leaving them both open to
enter negotiations with Comcast Spectacor.

After short-lived discussions between Rainbow Media and Comcast about the
latter possibly becoming a part-owner in PRISM and SportsChannel
Philadelphia,[6] on April 25, 1996, Comcast Spectacor formally announced plans
to create a new Philadelphia-centric sports network, which would carry both
the Flyers and Sixers; it also signed a deal with the Phillies, giving the new
network rights to most of their Major League Baseball games.[7][8] The deal
strained relations between Rainbow and Comcast Spectacor somewhat; Rainbow
offered a lower bid for the Flyers telecast rights during negotiations for a
one-year extension of its contract. Disagreements between the Flyers and
Rainbow Media over the amount the team would receive for the 1996–97 season
contract, led the Flyers to announce plans in late September that it would
assume production responsibilities for its home game broadcasts and sell the
local rights to its game telecasts to individual cable providers as a backup
plan if deal did not come to fruition.[9] Rainbow and Comcast Spectacor
finally reached a one-year, $5 million contract extension to keep its locally
televised games on PRISM and SportsChannel on October 4, 1996, the day before
its season home opener.[10]

On July 21, 1997, Comcast acquired the local television rights to broadcast
the 76ers' NBA games on the new **Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia** , with the
team choosing to opt out of its contract with PRISM and SportsChannel that was
set to run until the 1999–2000 season.[11] After much uncertainty, which
included plans for PRISM and SportsChannel to become affiliates of Fox Sports
Net (after News Corporation and Liberty Media purchased 40% of the sports
assets owned by Rainbow parent Cablevision on June 30, 1997[12][13]), Comcast
then reached agreements with Liberty and Rainbow Media to replace PRISM with
the Liberty-owned premium movie channel Starz! (which at the time, was
starting to expand its carriage outside of systems operated by its then co-
owner Tele-Communications, Inc.).[14][15]

Reports indicated that Comcast SportsNet initially would charge a per
subscriber rate of $1.50 a month (representatives for Comcast Spectacor stated
the rate was closer to the range of $1.20 to $1.35) to participating cable
providers, described as "one of the most expensive – if not the most
expensive" basic cable channel in the United States (a distinction that was
eventually assumed by the nationally distributed ESPN); SportsChannel
Philadelphia, by comparison, charged providers that carried the network
between 25¢ and 35¢ a month per subscriber. The company's demand that CSN
Philadelphia be offered as a basic cable service resulted in complaints by
some local providers (including Wade Cable, Lower Bucks Cablevision and Harron
Communications) because of the higher per subscriber rate; however, Jack
Williams, who was appointed as the original president of CSN Philadelphia,
said that the company would "not accept any arrangement other than running
SportsNet as a basic channel."[16] By September 1997, CSN had secured cable
coverage reaching approximately 1.5 million households (or 60% of the
network's regional territory).[17]

Williams promised that the network would carry more local programming than
other regional sports networks, with an estimated seven to eight hours of live
sports, and various news and discussion programs (including a four-hour
morning sports news program, and news and interview program in the late
afternoon).[11][18]

Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia launched on October 1, 1997, replacing
SportsChannel Philadelphia on local cable systems within the Philadelphia
metropolitan area;[19][20] with the launch, Comcast SportsNet became the
Philadelphia affiliate of Fox Sports Net.[21] Comcast expanded the Comcast
SportsNet brand to other markets over the next several years, through the
purchases of Fox Sports regional networks in San Francisco and Boston as well
as the launches of new channels in markets such as Chicago, Houston and
northern California.

With Comcast's acquisition of NBCUniversal in 2011, Comcast SportsNet was also
integrated into the new NBC Sports Group unit, culminating with the addition
of the peacock logo and an updated graphics package to mirror that of its
parent network. The updated graphics were implemented on CSN's live game
coverage and all studio shows, with the exception of _SportsNet Central_. In
September 2012, Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia and its sister Comcast
SportsNet outlets ceased carrying Fox Sports Networks-supplied programming,
after failing to reach an agreement to continue carrying FSN's nationally
distributed programs.[22] On January 2, 2014, as part of an agreement reached
on a 25-year broadcasting contract with the team (with the network paying the
team $100 million in rights fees each season through 2041, totaling around
$2.5 billion), the Philadelphia Phillies acquired a 25% equity stake in
Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia.[1]

Comcast rebranded the network as **NBC Sports Philadelphia** on October 2,
2017, as part of a larger rebranding of the Comcast SportsNet networks under
the NBC Sports brand.[23] However, the network's legal name remains **Comcast
SportsNet Philadelphia LP,** per the copyright notice on the network's
Website.

NBC Sports Philadelphia holds the regional television rights to the NBA's
Philadelphia 76ers,[11] NHL's Philadelphia Flyers, the Philadelphia Phillies
of Major League Baseball[7] and the Philadelphia Union of Major League Soccer.
In addition to live game telecasts, the network carries pre-game and pre-game
shows under the _Pre Game Live_ and _Post Game Live_ banners that bookend
76ers ( _Sixers Pre Game Live_ and _Sixers Post Game Live_ ), Phillies (
_Phillies Pre Game Live_ and _Phillies Post Game Live_ ), Flyers ( _Flyers Pre
Game Live_ and _Flyers Post Game Live_ ), and Union ( _Union Pre Game Live_
and _Union Post Game Live_ ) telecasts. Since 2010, the network has also
produced a limited schedule of Phillies regular season games for NBC owned-
and-operated sister station WCAU (channel 10). Although it does not hold the
regional rights to the NFL games involving the Philadelphia Eagles, the
network also produces pre-game and post-game shows on each game day ( _Eagles
Pre Game Live_ and _Eagles Post Game Live_ ).

The network formerly served as the broadcaster of American Hockey League games
involving the Philadelphia Phantoms (an affiliate team of the Flyers) until
the team relocated to Glens Falls, New York as the Adirondack Phantoms in
2009. It also carried indoor soccer matches involving the Philadelphia KiXX
from 1998 until the National Professional Soccer League folded in 2001; as
well as National Lacrosse League games featuring the Philadelphia Wings until
that team relocated to Uncasville, Connecticut as the New England Black Wolves
in 2014.

NBC Sports Philadelphia also maintains the television rights to the
Philadelphia Big 5, carrying regular season games from each of the member
universities as well as the association's City Series tournament; it also
broadcasts numerous men's and women's college sporting events sanctioned by
the Atlantic 10 Conference and the Colonial Athletic Association. Until
Comcast SportsNet discontinued its relationship with its competing RSN in
September 2012, the network also carried collegiate sports events from
Conference USA, the Pac-12 Conference and the Big 12 Conference, as well as
prime time Major League Baseball games on Thursdays distributed by Fox Sports
Networks.

**NBC Sports Philadelphia Plus** is a complimentary[ _vague_ ] full-time
channel that serves as an overflow network in the event that two local games
are scheduled to air simultaneously on NBC Sports Philadelphia. The network
was previously known as the Comcast Network.

Unlike most other cable networks, NBC Sports Philadelphia is distributed only
via microwave and fiber optic relays. Comcast inherited the terrestrial
infrastructure that it uses to transmit the network from PRISM at the time
that network shut down. Since NBC Sports Philadelphia did not uplink its
signal to any communications satellites, Comcast was able to avoid a
regulation outlined by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) that
requires most television channels to be offered to direct broadcast satellite
providers; this loophole, known as the "terrestrial exception", was
implemented by the FCC in 1992 to encourage investments in local programming
by cable providers. As a result of its limited availability, satellite
providers DirecTV, Dish Network and the now-defunct PrimeStar experienced a
far slower rate of subscriber penetration into the Philadelphia market
compared to other American cities.[25] Craig Moffett, a senior analyst with
Sanford C. Bernstein & Co. L.L.C., estimated the number of potential customers
lost due to the loophole at 450,000.[26]

This issue resulted in DirecTV filing an FCC complaint against Comcast on
September 23, 1997, claiming that it used unfair monopolistic control to keep
CSN Philadelphia from being made available via satellite (in contrast, DirecTV
had carried SportsChannel Philadelphia prior to its shutdown).[27][28] Three
days later on September 26, Comcast spokesperson Joe Waz issued a statement
defending the move, stating that it was "about competition" and that Comcast
SportsNet could help cable television "distinguish itself from satellite
rivals." Waz also accused DirecTV of unfairness in wanting to "profit" from
carrying the channel despite having "invested zero in improving the quality of
programming available to greater Philadelphia".[29]

On January 20, 2010, the FCC Board of Commissioners voted 4-1 to close the
"terrestrial exception" loophole.[30] Lawyers for DirecTV and Dish Network had
attempted to show that Comcast, the dominant cable provider in the
Philadelphia market, acted in restraint of trade by not uplinking Comcast
SportsNet Philadelphia to satellite. Comcast did not appeal the decision,
allowing DirecTV and Dish to immediately enter into carriage negotiations to
add the network. Both providers formally asked permission from Comcast to
carry CSN Philadelphia on June 25, 2010.[31] One month later on July 28, it
was reported that Comcast had entered into discussions with DirecTV and Dish
Network for carriage of CSN Philadelphia.[32] Two days later, after accusing
Comcast of refusing to negotiate in good faith, Dish Network stated it would
file a complaint with the FCC.[33][34] The United States Court of Appeals for
the District of Columbia upheld the FCC's original ruling on June 10,
2011.[35] Despite this ruling, Comcast has yet to offer CSN Philadelphia on
competing satellite providers.

The only current method of receiving NBC Sports Philadelphia via satellite
within the United States (as of April 2014[update]) is via C-band satellite
using a Cisco PowerVu receiver with authorization aimed toward the Galaxy 17
satellite at 91.0°W (transponder 11 at 3920 H).[36]

Cable providers other than Comcast within NBC Sports Philadelphia's designated
market territory do have access to the network. However, on December 4, 2006,
Comcast reached a deal with Verizon FiOS to carry CSN Philadelphia on its
systems in eastern Pennsylvania, Delaware and southern New Jersey.[37][38]

In 1998, Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia almost became available in Comcast's
New York City service area on systems in southern Middlesex County (in the
municipalities of Plainsboro, South Brunswick, Monroe, Cranbury, Jamesburg,
Helmetta, Spotswood and East Brunswick), as a replacement for PRISM. However,
days before it was set to be added, the NBA issued a cease and desist order
against Comcast, blocking the distribution of Philadelphia 76ers games in
Middlesex County; this was despite the fact that the league allowed New York
Knicks and New Jersey Nets games televised by MSG Network and Fox Sports New
York to be shown on both Comcast and TKR (now Cablevision) in Mercer County,
which is part of the Philadelphia market. Comcast opted not to carry CSN
Philadelphia, unwilling to distribute the network if it had to black out 76ers
game telecasts. Despite this, NBC Sports Philadelphia is carried by Comcast
Xfinity and Verizon FiOS in Ocean County (within their New York service
areas), Cablevision in Monmouth County (within its Allentown service area),
Comcast in Lambertville and by Service Electric in Phillipsburg, New Jersey.

Phillies games were previously unavailable through MLB Extra Innings on major
satellite providers. MLB Extra Innings began transmitting the CSN Philadelphia
feed for some games beginning in 2007 on both cable and satellite; the out-of-
market sports package began showing both feeds of most games in 2008, at which
time all of Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia's Phillies telecasts became
available to all subscribers. In 2010, Phillies telecasts produced by CSN
Philadelphia for MyNetworkTV affiliate WPHL-TV (channel 17) were also
broadcast on Extra Innings. Due to blackout restrictions imposed by Major
League Baseball, residents within the Philadelphia area, the eastern half of
Pennsylvania and most of New Jersey and Delaware cannot view these games via
the MLB Extra Innings package.

Because of the network's distribution exclusively in the Delaware Valley, ESPN
must reach agreements with ABC owned-and-operated station WPVI-TV (channel 6)
– owned by ESPN's majority owner The Walt Disney Company – to provide the
network recordings of any sporting events involving teams whose game
broadcasts are shown on Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia to include in highlight
packages seen on _Sportscenter_ , _NBA Fastbreak_ and _Baseball Tonight_.
These highlight excerpts were originally distributed in 480i standard
definition until 2012, when CSN began distributing to ESPN (via WPVI) in 720p
high definition.

As a consequence, national sports broadcasts have typically chosen to
broadcast clips from the HD "away" feed and avoid the CSN "home" Philadelphia
broadcast feed. However, MLB Network (which also has operational control of
NHL Network) and NBA TV have full access to NBC Sports Philadelphia's HD feed
since, as the rights holder, the network must provide full-quality video to
the properties of each league for their internet and cable operations, while
Comcast provides full high-definition access to NBC Sports Philadelphia to
NBCSN and NHL Network, which both carry NHL games nationwide.

