**NBC Sports Washington** is an American regional sports network that is owned
by NBCUniversal and Monumental Sports & Entertainment, and operates as an
affiliate of NBC Sports Regional Networks. Headquartered in Bethesda,
Maryland, the channel broadcasts regional coverage of sports events throughout
the Mid-Atlantic United States, with a focus on professional sports teams
based in Baltimore and Washington, D.C., as well as sports news and
entertainment programming.

NBC Sports Washington is available on approximately 25 cable providers
throughout Maryland, Virginia and the District of Columbia, as well as parts
of Delaware, Pennsylvania, North Carolina and West Virginia; it is also
available nationwide on satellite via DirecTV and Dish Network. The channel
reaches more than 4.7 million households in the Mid-Atlantic region.

The network was launched as **Home Team Sports** ( **HTS** ) on April 4, 1984.
Originally owned by Westinghouse Broadcasting, it was one of the first
regional sports networks in the United States. In 1990, HTS became an
affiliate of the Prime Network.

In 1996, the network was folded into CBS Cable, a cable television division
formed through Westinghouse's merger with CBS. Along with most of its sister
networks, in 1997, the channel became an affiliate of Fox Sports Net, a group
of regional sports networks formed the previous year through News
Corporation's partial acquisition of Prime through a joint venture with that
network's parent Liberty Media. News Corporation subsequently purchased a 34%
ownership interest in HTS. CBS Corporation, which remained majority owner,
eventually merged into Viacom in 1999, in a deal worth $91 billion.

Shortly after Viacom completed its merger with CBS, on June 10, 2000, Viacom
announced that it would sell Home Team Sports and Minneapolis-based regional
sports network Midwest Sports Channel.[1][2] One month later on July 11,
Comcast agreed to acquire a 75% ownership stake in HTS and the Midwest Sports
Channel from CBS, in a deal worth approximately $150 million.[3][4] News
Corporation, which wanted to acquire full ownership of both networks, filed a
lawsuit ten days later on July 21 in an attempt to block the sale of MSC and
Home Team Sports.[5][6]

On September 7, 2000, as part of a settlement between the two companies,
Comcast traded its equity interest in Midwest Sports Channel to News
Corporation in exchange for sole ownership of Home Team Sports.[7] The
transaction was completed seven months later in mid-February 2001.[8] The
channel was relaunched as **Comcast SportsNet Mid-Atlantic** on April 4, 2001,
exactly seventeen years after the network's original launch.[9] The channel
continued to carry national programming supplied by Fox Sports Net after the
sale.

In 2010, Comcast SportsNet Mid-Atlantic split its website into two regional
websites, and rebranded them as "Comcast SportsNet Baltimore" and "Comcast
SportsNet Washington". While the websites were rebranded, the network still
maintains a singular feed that is transmitted throughout its entire coverage
area. 5 years later, CSN Mid-Atlantic consolidated the two regional websites
back together again as CSNMidAtlantic.com.

In September 2012, Comcast SportsNet Mid-Atlantic and its sister Comcast
SportsNet outlets ceased carrying Fox Sports Networks-supplied programming,
after failing to reach an agreement to continue carrying FSN's nationally
distributed programs.[10]

In October 2016, CSN Mid-Atlantic announced that it would extend its broadcast
rights to the Washington Capitals and Washington Wizards through a long-term
deal with the teams' owner, Monumental Sports & Entertainment. As a result,
Monumental Sports & Entertainment took an equity stake in the network, while
NBCUniversal took an equity stake in the Monumental Sports Network—an over-
the-top subscription service focusing on other teams owned by the company.[11]

Comcast rebranded the network as **NBC Sports Washington** on October 2, 2017,
as part of a larger rebranding of the Comcast SportsNet networks under the NBC
Sports brand.[12]

NBC Sports Washington televises more than 500 live professional and collegiate
sporting events per year. The network holds the exclusive regional cable
television rights to the NHL's Washington Capitals and the NBA's Washington
Wizards – airing all games that are not nationally exclusive – as well as the
Washington Mystics of the WNBA and the Chesapeake Bayhawks of Major League
Lacrosse. The network formerly held the television rights to the Virginia
Destroyers of the United Football League, broadcasting the team's games from
2011 until the UFL folded in 2012. D.C. United of Major League Soccer had its
games televised by CSN Mid-Atlantic from the team's first season in 1996 until
2015, after which the team signed a multi-year deal with Sinclair Broadcast
Group-owned WJLA-TV and NewsChannel 8.

The network also serves as the official cable partner of the NFL's Washington
Redskins, holding the rights to televise the team's preseason games; until the
consummation of the 2012 merger between NBC and Comcast, which placed Comcast
SportsNet Mid-Atlantic and NBC owned-and-operated station WRC-TV (channel 4)
under common ownership, games broadcast on WRC-TV were transmitted in 480i
standard definition to provide high-definition exclusivity for the regional
network. After the merger, both WRC and CSN Mid-Atlantic carry Redskins games
in HD.

NBC Sports Washington also maintains the regional television rights to the
Atlantic Coast Conference and Colonial Athletic Association, and broadcasts
numerous men's and women's college sporting events sanctioned by those
conferences, often featuring the Virginia Tech Hokies and Virginia Cavaliers.
The network also carries college sports events from Conference USA, the Pac-12
Conference and the Big 12 Conference distributed by Fox Sports Networks.

NBC Sports Washington produces news, analysis, opinion and entertainment
programs focusing the region's sports landscape. The network also features
special pre-game and post-game shows, as well as numerous specials and
original programs:

**Washington Wizards**

**Washington Capitals**

**Washington Mystics**

**Washington Redskins**

**Chesapeake Bayhawks**

**NBC Sports Washington Plus** (formerly the Comcast Network) is an overflow
channel of NBC Sports Washington, which broadcasts select sports events that
cannot be carried on the main channel due to a concurring live event. NBC
Sports Washington Plus is carried by DirecTV, and on most cable providers
throughout the Mid-Atlantic region.

