**NBC Sports Regional Networks** is the collective name for a group of
regional sports networks in the United States that are primarily owned and
operated by the NBCUniversal division of the cable television company Comcast.
The networks were originally established as **Comcast SportsNet** ( **CSN** ),
a unit of Comcast's cable television business, beginning with a network in
Philadelphia which launched in 1997. Their operations were aligned with the
national NBC Sports division following the 2011 acquisition of NBC Universal
by Comcast. NBC Sports Regional Networks' business and master control
operations are based in New York City.

The group operates seven regional networks; Comcast also has a partial
ownership interest in SportsNet New York, which is co-owned with Charter
Communications and the New York Mets. Each of the networks carries regional
broadcasts of sporting events from various professional, collegiate and high
school sports teams (with broadcasts typically exclusive to each individual
network, although some are shown on more than one network within a particular
team's designated market area), along with regional and national sports
discussion, documentary and analysis programs.

After their realignment with NBC Sports, the networks initially continued to
operate primarily under the Comcast SportsNet name. Although Comcast
originally considered dropping its name from the networks in favor of NBC
Sports following the merger, they still operated under the CSN brand for at
least more six years. The group's two networks in California were then re-
branded under the NBC Sports brand in April 2017, while the remaining networks
were renamed on October 2, 2017.

The origins of Comcast SportsNet are traced to Comcast's March 19, 1996
purchase of a 66% interest in Spectacor and its primary assets – the
Philadelphia Flyers, The Spectrum and the then-recently completed CoreStates
Center – for $240 million and the assumption of a collective $170 million in
debt; the new Comcast Spectacor (which appointed the company's previous
majority owner, Edward M. Snider, as its chairman) also immediately purchased
a 66% interest in the Philadelphia 76ers.[1][2]

Immediately after the purchase was announced, there was speculation that
Comcast would let Spectacor's television contracts with two local premium
services that had long been carrying their games – PRISM (which carried movies
and specials, in addition to sports events) and the all-sports network
SportsChannel Philadelphia (both owned by Rainbow Media) – run out and create
a sports network of its own, buy the existing networks or reach a complex deal
with Rainbow to have PRISM and SportsChannel Philadelphia retain the broadcast
rights to the 76ers and Flyers.[3][4] Comcast immediately approached the
Philadelphia Phillies – whose contract with PRISM and Sports Channel
Philadelphia ended after the 1997 season – about entering into a broadcast
deal, indicating it would launch an RSN.[1]

After short-lived discussions between Rainbow Media and Comcast about the
latter possibly becoming a part-owner in PRISM and SportsChannel
Philadelphia,[5] on April 25, 1996, Comcast Spectacor formally announced plans
to create a new Philadelphia-centric basic cable channel, which would carry
sports events from the Flyers (whose contract with PRISM and SportsChannel was
set to end that fall and was extended by one year on October 4, 1996, the day
before its season home opener, after strained contract negotiations) and the
Phillies.[6][7][8] On July 21, 1997, Comcast acquired the local television
rights to the Philadelphia 76ers, with the team opting out of its contract
with PRISM and SportsChannel that was set to run until the 1999–2000
season.[9]

The launch of the new network, Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia, effectively
shuttered PRISM and SportsChannel Philadelphia when it launched on October 1,
1997, with the network directly replacing the latter on Philadelphia area
local cable systems.[10]

CSN began to expand with a series of acquisitions and new establishments: on
July 11, 2000, Comcast acquired a 75% majority interest in
Washington/Baltimore-area regional sports network Home Team Sports and
Minneapolis-based network Midwest Sports Channel from Viacom for approximately
$150 million.[11][12] Minority owner News Corporation, which wanted to acquire
full ownership of both networks to make them part of its Fox Sports Net group,
sued Comcast and Viacom on July 21 in an attempt to block the sale.[13]

On September 7, 2000, as part of a settlement between the two companies,
Comcast traded its equity interest in Midwest Sports Channel to News
Corporation in exchange for sole ownership of Home Team Sports.[14] HTS was
later relaunched as Comcast SportsNet Mid-Atlantic on April 4, 2001.[15][16]

On October 1, 2004, Comcast SportsNet Chicago was launched to replace FSN
Chicago, as the local teams wanted to have editorial control over their
broadcasts. Also in October 2004, Comcast SportsNet West was launched
conjunction with Maloof Sports & Entertainment, owners of the Sacramento
Kings. The channel was renamed Comcast SportsNet California in 2008.

On April 30, 2007, Cablevision Systems Corporation sold its 50% ownership
interests in FSN Bay Area and FSN New England to Comcast for $570 million (the
San Francisco Giants were added as a partner in FSN Bay Area, when the team
acquired a 30% stake in the network on December 10);[17][18][19] subsequently,
FSN New England rebranded as Comcast SportsNet New England in July 2007,[19]
while FSN Bay Area was rebranded as Comcast SportsNet Bay Area on March 31 of
that year.

As the result of the acquisition of NBC Universal by Comcast in February 2011,
the operations of CSN, along with sister national sports networks Versus and
Golf Channel, were integrated into the NBC Sports division. Plans called for
the Comcast SportsNet outlets to take on the division's new "look and feel",
which would be introduced in January 2012 alongside the then-upcoming re-
launch of Versus as NBC Sports Network, although plans to drop the CSN name in
favor of the NBC Sports brand were later shelved.[20][21][22]

In April 2012, NBC Owned Television Stations took over responsibilities of
selling national advertising on behalf of four CSN networks (New England, Mid-
Atlantic, Northwest, and Philadelphia). For "unwired sales", the Group will be
continue to be represented by Home Team Sports. The arrangement is an
extension of one that it had established with New England Cable News in
2011.[23]

In early 2012, Comcast signed a contract worth $1 billion with the Houston
Astros and Houston Rockets, which formed a new joint venture in which the two
teams would own a 77.307% ownership interest in a new Houston-based sports
network (with Comcast holding the remaining 22.693% interest); Comcast
SportsNet Houston launched on October 1, 2012, assuming the rights to the
Rockets and Astros from Fox Sports Houston,[24] which shut down three days
later.[25] After filing an involuntary Chapter 11 bankruptcy petition for the
network on September 27, 2013, to "resolve structural issues affecting CSN
Houston's partnership,"[26] DirecTV Sports Networks and AT&T acquired Comcast
SportsNet Houston on August 6, 2014 as part of a reorganization plan (with
DirecTV as majority owner at 60%).[27] The network was then integrated into
DirecTV-operated Root Sports group, which relaunched it as Root Sports
Southwest on November 14, 2014.[28]

In markets that didn't have an affiliate of that group, Comcast SportsNet also
carried national programming distributed by competing regional sports network
chain FSN (which included various college sports and UEFA Champions League
soccer), a relationship that traced back to the launch of Comcast SportsNet
Philadelphia (which took over the FSN programming rights from SportsChannel
Philadelphia).[29] CSN quietly dropped all FSN-supplied programming on August
1, 2012, after failing to reach an agreement to continue carrying FSN's
nationally distributed programs.[30]

On March 22, 2017, the division announced that it would rebrand CSN Bay Area
and CSN California to NBC Sports Bay Area and NBC Sports California on April
2, 2017, coinciding with the start of the 2017 Major League Baseball season.
Division president David Preschlack stated that the re-branding was meant to
"better associate the prestigious NBC Sports legacy with the strength of our
Comcast Sports Networks' local sports coverage in Northern California."[31] On
August 22, 2017, it was announced that the other networks, besides SNY, would
migrate to the NBC Sports name. In some regions, the name of the network was
narrowed, with CSN Mid-Atlantic renamed "NBC Sports Washington", and CSN New
England renamed "NBC Sports Boston". In addition, The Comcast Network channels
were also rebranded, with TCN Mid-Atlantic becoming NBC Sports Washington
Plus, and TCN Philadelphia becoming NBC Sports Philadelphia Plus.[32] The
rebranding took effect on October 2, 2017, coinciding with the start of the
2017–18 NHL and NBA seasons.[33][34]

New England Cable News, a regional news channel owned by Comcast, was operated
as a part of Comcast Sports Group and CSN prior to Comcast's purchase of NBC
Universal. In July 2013, as part of a corporate reorganization, NECN had its
operations transferred to NBC Owned Television Stations (the unit of
NBCUniversal Television Group responsible for running NBC and Telemundo's
owned-and-operated stations), and eventually became the journalistic
foundation of NBC's new Boston O&O, WBTS-LD, in January 2017.[43]

Comcast also owned Comcast Local (CL), a Detroit-based sports network that was
distributed throughout Michigan and central Indiana. The network provided
coverage of local collegiate and high school sports events, as well as minor
league sports throughout its broadcast area. Comcast Local ceased operations
in February 2008, as every major professional or college team in the region
had its programming tied to FSN Detroit and/or the Big Ten Network.[44][45]

Each regional channel (and in some cases, their alternate feed) has its own
separate high-definition feed, with their own set schedules of programming –
including live sports events as well as locally produced and NBC Sports-
distributed national programs and live studio shows – available in HD. NBC
Sports Northwest currently does not maintain a high-definition simulcast in
the Seattle market.

Most NBC Sports Regional Networks maintain alternate (or overflow) feeds under
the **Plus** brand (with the network's regional name suffixed preceding the
"Plus" title) for the broadcast of two or more events involving teams the
respective network holds the broadcast rights to carry. Comcast SportsNet
Philadelphia maintained a different arrangement, using sister channel The
Comcast Network to serve as a de facto overflow network in the event that two
local games were scheduled to air simultaneously on CSN Philadelphia.

Each of the NBC Sports regional network outlets have acquired the play-by-play
broadcast rights to major sports teams in their regional market (exempting NFL
regular season or playoff games, since the league's contracts require all
games to be aired on broadcast television in each participating team's local
markets). In addition to local play-by-play coverage, the NBC Sports networks
also produce and broadcast pre-game and post-game shows, and broadcasts weekly
"magazine" shows centered on the teams that maintain rights with the
individual network. In some markets, NBC Sports competes directly with other
regional sports networks for the broadcast rights to team-specific
programming.

