**NBC Sports California** (sometimes abbreviated as **NBCS California** ) is
an American regional sports network that is owned by the NBC Sports Group unit
of NBCUniversal, and operates as an affiliate of NBC Sports Regional Networks.
The channel broadcasts regional coverage of professional and college sports
events throughout Northern California, as well as original sports-related
news, discussion and entertainment programming.

NBC Sports California is available on cable and fiber optic television
providers throughout northern California, and portions of Oregon and western
Nevada. The network maintains main studios and offices headquartered with
sister network NBC Sports Bay Area in San Francisco, California.

In summer 2003, Comcast acquired the regional television rights to broadcast
regular-season and early-round playoff games from the Sacramento Kings.
Previously, the team's game broadcasts were only available either via pay-per-
view sports packages and on an alternate feed of then Cablevision-owned
SportsChannel Bay Area. As a result, Comcast created a new regional sports
network to broadcast the team's games; the network launched as **Comcast
SportsNet West** in October 2004, coinciding with the start of the Kings'
regular season.

Although the network originally focused on the Northern California region, it
began expanding its coverage to serve as a complement to Comcast SportsNet Bay
Area. This began with the network's rebranding to **Comcast SportsNet
California** in September 2008; it subsequently became the official
broadcaster of the Oakland Athletics (which previously broadcast their games
on Comcast SportsNet Bay Area, in addition to the San Francisco Giants) for
the 2009 Major League Baseball season, broadcasting 145 regular-season games
that year (a substantial increase from 37 telecasts in 2008).[1] The San Jose
Sharks followed the A's from CSN Bay Area for the 2009–10 NHL season, seeing a
similar increase in game broadcasts with 75 games being shown overall (50 of
which were televised in high definition).[2] With the relaunch, Comcast
SportsNet Bay Area and California merged editorial coverage on their
respective regional websites. Many cable providers in the San Francisco Bay
Area that previously carried CSN California via digital cable have since moved
the network to basic cable tiers.

In September 2009, CSN California's carriage agreement with Dish Network
expired; however, the satellite provider continued to carry the network in the
interim while the two parties attempted to reach a renewed contract.
Negotiations went on for months, leading Dish to file a request with the
Federal Communications Commission to enter into arbitration hearings to
formalize a deal. Dish Network lost its case and dropped Comcast SportsNet
California from its lineup on November 24, 2010.[3] On February 3, 2011, Dish
Network restored CSN California after the satellite provider reached an
agreement to carry the channel without any legal arbitration.[4]

In September 2012, Comcast SportsNet California and its sister Comcast
SportsNet outlets ceased carrying Fox Sports Networks-supplied programming,
after failing to reach an agreement to continue carrying FSN's nationally
distributed programs.[5]

In July 2014, CSN California reached a new 20-year deal for regional rights to
the Sacramento Kings beginning in the 2013–14 season, estimated to be worth
nearly $700 million over the length of the contract. The contract increased
the number of games CSN broadcasts per-season from 70 to 80 over the previous
season (where a package was syndicated to terrestrial television), saw the
network take over advertising sales during the telecasts, and commit to
broadcasting an increased amount of team-related programming (including pre-
and post-game shows, and a monthly _Kings Central_ program).[6][7]

On March 22, 2017, Comcast announced that CSN California would be rebranded
**NBC Sports California** on April 2, 2017, in a move meant to "better
associate the prestigious NBC Sports legacy with the strength of our Comcast
Sports Networks' local sports coverage in Northern California".[8]

NBC Sports California holds the regional cable television rights to the
Oakland Athletics of Major League Baseball, the NHL's San Jose Sharks, the
NBA's Sacramento Kings, and the AFL's San Jose SaberCats. The network produces
its pre-game and post-game shows for Oakland Athletics either on-site during
home games, or on the _SportsNet Central_ set at the NBC Sports Bay Area
studios during road games. The station also airs _Shark Byte_ , a magazine
program focusing on the San Jose Sharks that originated on Comcast SportsNet
Bay Area.

The network also simulcasts NBC Sports Bay Area-produced telecasts of games
involving the San Francisco Giants Major League Baseball franchise and the San
Jose Earthquakes of Major League Soccer. It formerly broadcast games from the
WNBA's Sacramento Monarchs until the team folded in 2011; the Sacramento
Mountain Lions from 2009 until the United Football League folded; and the
PASL's Stockton Cougars until that team folded in 2011. The network also
carries programming related to the NFL's Oakland Raiders.

NBC Sports California also televises college sports involving Northern
California schools, including St. Mary's College, the University of San
Francisco, the University of the Pacific, and Santa Clara University. The
channel formerly broadcast sporting events involving the California Golden
Bears and Stanford Cardinal that were not on national television until the
formation of the Pac-12 Network in August 2012. Select high school sports
events are also occasionally broadcast on the network, including weekly high
school football games on Friday nights during the fall.[9]

NBC Sports California currently carries the NBC Sports Bay Area original
program _Chronicle Live_ , a sports discussion program produced in conjunction
with the _San Francisco Chronicle_ , each weeknight at 12:00 a.m. The network
also carries a live video simulcast of _TheGary Radnich Show_ (hosted by the
longtime sports anchor at MyNetworkTV affiliate KRON-TV) from KNBR (680 and
1050 AM) in San Francisco each weekday from 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., except on
rare occasions when it is pre-empted by a live sporting event on either
outlet. NBC Sports California previously also broadcast the "Raiders Report",
a weekly show featuring news and game highlights on the Oakland Raiders. In
September 2009, the program was replaced by a live post-game show airing
immediately after network telecasts of Raiders games.

**NBC Sports California HD** is a 1080i high-definition simulcast feed of
Comcast SportsNet California. The feed broadcasts all Sacramento Kings home
game telecasts, as well as all home and some road games involving the San Jose
Sharks in HD. In 2010, CSN California began broadcasting all Athletics games
in high definition.[10]

