**NBC Sports Group** is a division of NBCUniversal that is responsible for NBC
Sports' media properties, encompassing the NBC television network's sports
division as well as day-to-day operation of the company's sports-oriented
cable networks and other properties such as NBC Sports Radio.

The unit has its origins in Comcast Sports Group, a division which oversaw
Comcast's Golf Channel and Versus cable networks, as well as the regional
sports network chain Comcast SportsNet. In February 2011, Comcast completed
its acquisition of a majority stake in NBC Universal. Following the
acquisition, plans were unveiled for the three networks to be subsumed by the
NBC network's existing division NBC Sports, under the title NBC Sports Group,
with Dick Ebersol as chairman.[1][2][3] Mark Lazarus, formerly the head of
Turner Entertainment Group, was named president of NBC Sports Cable Group.
Comcast Sports Group president Jon Litner assumed the role of president of
Comcast SportsNet and Versus, while former NBC Sports executive vice president
Mike McCarley was named president of Golf Channel. John Miller was named
executive vice president of NBC Sports and Versus.[4]

In May 2011, Lazarus took over for Ebersol as chairman of the group.[5] In
June 2011, NBC Sports Group purchased back the Alli Sports share held by MTV
Networks Music Group in June 2011 and previously sold by NBC Sports to them in
2008.[6] On January 1, 2012, Versus was renamed NBC Sports Network.[7]

On December 9, 2012, Yahoo and the NBC Sports Group announced a content and
promotional deal[8] combining Yahoo Sports’ original reporting expertise,
coverage of big events, Rivals’ college content and popular fantasy sports
products with NBC Sports Group's growing digital assets, and significant
television promotion and integration.

On March 18, 2013, nearly all of the operations for NBC Sports and NBCSN began
to be based out of a purpose-built facility in Stamford, Connecticut. The move
was made mainly to take advantage of tax credits given by the state of
Connecticut, which NBC has taken advantage of previously with the daytime talk
shows of its sister broadcast syndication division.[9]

Telemundo Deportes, a dedicated Hispanic sports production unit, was also
announced by Joe Uva, Chairman of NBCUniversal Hispanic Group, and chairman
Mark Lazarus at May 2015 Upfronts. Telemundo Deportes was also in process of
moving to the NBC Sports Group facility in Stamford.[10]

NBC Sports Group formed NBC Sports Films in 2015 for long form sports
documentaries for the sports group's platforms. The first film was _Center of
Attention: The Unreal Life of Derek Sanderson_ which was broadcast on NBC
Sports Network June 8 after the Stanley Cup Final Game 3.[11]

On October 22, 2015, it was announced that Universal Sports Network would
close down on November 16, 2015, and that NBC Sports would inherit the
network's portfolio of sports rights for its own networks and channels.[12]
The Group launched two channels just for the 2016 Olympic games, NBC Olympic
Basketball and NBC Olympic Soccer.[13]

In May 2016, NBC Sports Group broke out its streaming technology unit into an
entity known as Playmaker Media, to serve other NBCUniversal properties as
well as third-party clients (thus competing with BAMTech).[14][15] In June
2016, NBC Sports Group launched NBC Sports Gold, an over-the-top streaming
service containing subscription-based packages focused on different
sports.[16]

In July 2016, NBC Sports Group acquired Sport Ngin, a Minneapolis-based
provider of digital services for youth and amateur sports organizations. The
unit was renamed SportsEngine.[17] The group purchased the All-American Bowl
high school all star game in February 2019.[18]

