**NBC Sports Chicago** is an American regional sports network. The channel
broadcasts regional coverage of professional sports teams in the Chicago
metropolitan area, as well as college sports events and original sports-
related news, discussion and entertainment programming.

NBC Sports Chicago is owned by the NBC Sports Group unit of NBCUniversal
(which owns 20%, and is itself owned by Comcast, the primary cable provider in
the Chicago market), the family of Chicago Cubs owner J. Joseph Ricketts (who
own 20%), Chicago Bulls and White Sox owner Jerry Reinsdorf (who owns a 40%
majority interest), and Chicago Blackhawks owner Rocky Wirtz (who owns 20%).

The channel is available on cable and fiber optic television providers in most
of Illinois, and throughout northern Indiana, Iowa, Kenosha County, Wisconsin
and southwest Michigan and nationwide on satellite providers DirecTV and Dish
Network. The network maintains main studios and offices located at 350 North
Orleans Street, inside the River North Point Center in the Near North Side
area.

In November 2003, Jerry Reinsdorf, Bill Wirtz and the Tribune Company decided
to end their cable television agreements for their respective teams, the
Bulls, White Sox, Cubs and Blackhawks with FSN Chicago, stripping that network
of broadcast rights to all of the professional sports teams in the Chicago
area. All three team owners decided to enter into a partnership with Comcast
to form a new regional sports network, to be named **Comcast SportsNet
Chicago** , whose launch was formally announced on December 2.[1][2] CSN
Chicago was created in order for the four teams to have editorial control over
their broadcasts, although the network continued to share the rights to the
Cubs, White Sox, Blackhawks and Bulls with WGN-TV (channel 9; which is owned
by Tribune) and (until 2014) WCIU-TV (channel 26).

Comcast SportsNet Chicago launched on October 1, 2004. At that time, with the
loss of all four teams from its lineup, FSN Chicago was effectively left with
only events from some minor local and semi-professional teams, national
programming from Fox Sports Net, and Midwestern outdoors programs on its
schedule; many cable and satellite providers in northeastern Illinois and
northwest Indiana also chose to replace FSN Chicago with CSN Chicago upon its
launch.

After Rainbow Media shut down FSN Chicago on June 23, 2006,[3] Comcast
SportsNet Chicago acquired the regional cable television rights to broadcast
sports events, discussion and entertainment programs intended for national
distribution to the Fox Sports regional networks. The network subsequently
relocated its operations into FSN Chicago's former studio facilities on
Orleans Street (which NBC Sports Chicago now also shares with the offices of
the _Chicago Sun-Times_ ).

On April 2, 2007, the Tribune Company announced its intent to sell its shares
in both Comcast SportsNet Chicago and the Chicago Cubs as part of the
company's $8.2 billion purchase by real estate magnate Sam Zell.[4]

After inheriting the team from father Bill Wirtz upon his death in September
2007, new Chicago Blackhawks owner Rocky Wirtz decided to lift a longstanding
ban on televised coverage of the team's home games (which the elder Wirtz
imposed as a means to sustain ticket sales).[5] On March 30, 2008, the
Blackhawks announced a broadcasting agreement, which renewed CSN Chicago's
broadcast rights (with the network carrying the bulk of the games), while also
splitting a share of the local broadcasts with WGN-TV effective with the
2008â€“09 season; all of the team's games (both home and away) would be
televised in high definition (due to the NHL's broadcast contracts, including
ironically one with eventual Comcast division NBCUniversal, WGN-TV was barred
from carrying its share of Blackhawks telecasts on its former national
superstation feed WGN America, although its game telecasts were available in
Canada through the station's carriage as a superstation on domestic cable and
satellite providers).[6]

Comcast SportsNet Chicago, along with the other Comcast SportsNet-branded
networks, implemented a new network logo style (utilizing Comcast's then-
universal corporate logo) and graphics package on October 1, 2008, coinciding
with the fourth anniversary of the network's launch.

On January 5, 2009, the network premiered _Monsters in the Morning_ , a
weekday morning talk show hosted by former WSCR radio host Mike North and
Comcast SportsNet Chicago reporter and former Chicago Bear Dan Jiggetts. The
program was cancelled in January 2010, due to problems involving the show,
including the program's main sponsor, the now-defunct online sports channel
ChicagoSportsWebio.com, being implicated in defrauding North, Jiggetts and
others in a money laundering scheme in June 2009;[7] North subsequently became
the host of _Monsters and Money in the Morning_ , a short-lived program for
CBS owned-and-operated station WBBM-TV (channel 2), which briefly replaced
that station's morning newscast.

On August 21, 2009, the Tribune Company sold its interests in the Chicago
Cubs, Wrigley Field and 25% of Comcast SportsNet to the family of TD
Ameritrade founder J. Joseph Ricketts for $845 million.[8][9]

With Comcast's acquisition of NBC Universal in February 2011, Comcast
SportsNet was also integrated into the new NBC Sports Group unit, culminating
with the addition of the peacock logo in September 2012 and an updated
graphics package based on that introduced by NBC Sports for its NBC and
national cable broadcasts in January 2013. The updated graphics were
implemented on CSN's live game coverage and all studio shows, with the
exception of _SportsNet Central_.

In September 2012, Comcast SportsNet Chicago and its sister Comcast SportsNet
outlets ceased carrying Fox Sports Networks-supplied programming, after
failing to reach an agreement to continue carrying FSN's nationally
distributed programs.[10] _SportsNet Central_ would ultimately implement a new
on-air look of its own and on April 14, 2014, in conjunction with that change,
the program switched to the updated graphics package introduced three years
earlier.

On October 2, 2017, the network was rebranded as **NBC Sports Chicago** , as
part of a larger rebranding of the Comcast SportsNet networks under the NBC
Sports brand.[11]

On January 2, 2019, the White Sox, Bulls, and Blackhawks agreed to an
exclusive multi-year deal with NBC Sports Chicago beginning in the fall of
2019, ending their broadcasts on WGN-TV. The Cubs, with the 2020 launch of the
team-owned Marquee Sports Network, will move on to that cable channel after 15
years with the network ending with the 2019 season.[12][13][14][15][16]

In April 2019, the network acquired regional rights to the Chicago Red Stars
of the National Women's Soccer League.[17]

Through its majority ownership by the owners of each of the four teams, NBC
Sports Chicago holds the regional cable television rights to air a majority of
games involving the Chicago Cubs and Chicago White Sox Major League Baseball
clubs, the NBA's Chicago Bulls and the NHL's Chicago Blackhawks. However, as
Chicago is one of the scant few remaining U.S. markets whose baseball and
basketball teams broadcast their games both over-the-air and on local cable,
the network shares the broadcast rights to all four teams with WGN-TV, while
both share the rights to the Cubs with ABC owned-and-operated station WLS-TV
(channel 7). The network also holds the broadcast rights to games involving
the Chicago Fire S.C. of Major League Soccer. The channel had held the
broadcast rights to games of the now-defunct Chicago Rush of the Arena
Football League.

On April 13, 2010, CSN Chicago announced that it had signed a contract with
Chicago Fire S.C. to broadcast at least eight of the franchise's matches for
the 2010 season; on January 26, 2015, Comcast SportsNet Chicago signed a
three-year contract with the Chicago Fire to become the team's exclusive local
television broadcaster, after having carried its games the previous two years
on WPWR-TV.[18]

The network also carries collegiate sports events including football games
involving the Northern Illinois University Huskies and basketball games from
the Illinois State University Redbirds. Prior to the termination of Comcast
SportsNet's groupwide programming agreement with Fox Sports Networks, CSN
Chicago additionally broadcast FSN's national programming following the
shutdown of FSN Chicago, notably including the network's college sports
coverage, such as Atlantic Coast Conference men's and women's basketball games
(on Sundays), men's basketball games from the Pac-12 Conference (on various
nights) and college football games from the Big 12 Conference and Pac-12
Conference (on Saturdays during the fall).

Beginning in 2016, CSN Chicago obtained the exclusive rights to championship
games for the Iowa High School Athletic Association in football, basketball
and wrestling, replacing the previous model of a statewide broadcast network
in Iowa of stations in each market.[19]

NBC Sports Chicago's flagship program is _SportsNet Central_ , a nightly
sports news program featuring live reports and coverage on the Chicago area's
major sports teams as well as game highlights from local and national teams;
the program also features special regular segments such as "Luke-A-Likes" (a
popular segment hosted by Luke Stuckmeyer on nights when he hosts the program,
a viewer-voting segment featuring photos submitted by viewers claiming to
resemble a particular sports figure) and the "Chicago Sports Trivia Question"
(a bumper segment shown before and after a commercial break featuring trivia
questions related to Chicago sports).

The network also carries team magazine and coaches shows focusing on the
Bulls, Blackhawks, Cubs and White Sox, as well as the Northern Illinois
University and Illinois State University football and basketball teams.

Since the network launched in 2004, NBC Sports Chicago has hosted the _CSN
Chicago Sports Awards_ , an annual award show to raise money for the March of
Dimes (this program dates back to 1987, when the children's charity started
the benefit in partnership with SportsChannel Chicago, the later FSN Chicago).
The honorees included top athletes from Chicago's professional sports teams,
who were chosen based on their contributions to their teams and the Chicago
community. To date, the "CSN Chicago Sports Awards" has raised over $6 million
for the March of Dimes.

**NBC Sports Chicago Plus** is an overflow feed of NBC Sports Chicago, which
is primarily used to alleviate scheduling conflicts that result when two
sports events involving teams that the network holds the right to broadcast
are scheduled to occur simultaneously. The network operates a secondary
overflow, **NBC Sports Chicago Plus 2** , or in the past listed as Alternate,
if three concurring sporting events are scheduled for the same time. Both
networks have also sometimes been used to show locally produced and FSN-
distributed college sports events.

NBC Sports Chicago Plus' HD simulcast feed was previously used as a help
channel (an information channel providing instructional information on
products offered by the provider) on Comcast systems when no sports events
were being telecast (it had been the channel slot for MOJO HD before its 2008
shutdown); it now carries programming originally broadcast on the main NBC
Sports Chicago network outside of sporting events.

Originally operating as a gametime-only service, cable providers mainly
transmit NBC Sports Chicago Plus and NBC Sports Chicago Plus 2 on non-critical
networks, with Comcast carrying the primary Plus feed over the channel slot
occupied by regional news channel Chicagoland Television (CLTV) or on another
slot (such as channel 101) on its Chicago systems; conversely, Dish Network
carries the standard definition feed of the main Plus network on alternating
channels assigned by the satellite provider. At times when NBC Sports Chicago
Plus and NBC Sports Chicago Plus 2 are broadcasting at the same time, one of
the overflows will be carried on the alternate channel, mostly on C-SPAN2, in
the case of cable providers.

**NBC Sports Chicago HD** is a 1080i high definition simulcast of NBC Sports
Chicago. It carries all home and road games involving the Chicago Cubs,
Chicago White Sox, Chicago Blackhawks, Chicago Bulls and Chicago Fire as well
as all studio shows in high definition. NBC Sports Chicago HD is carried on
Comcast, RCN, WOW! Internet, Phone and Cable and AT&T U-verse within the
Chicago market, and nationally on DirecTV and Dish Network.

The network's overflow feeds, NBC Sports Chicago Plus and NBC Sports Chicago
Plus 2, also maintain HD simulcasts: NBC Sports Chicago Plus HD is available
only part-time on Comcast systems within outer markets and full-time on
Comcast systems in the Chicago metro area and on AT&T U-verse, while NBC
Sports Chicago Plus 2 HD is available only through DishNetwork, AT&T U-verse
and DirecTV (most cable providers carry the Plus 2 feed in standard
definition).

