**NBC Sports Boston** is an American regional sports network that is owned by
the NBC Sports Group unit of NBCUniversal, and operates as an affiliate of NBC
Sports Regional Networks. Headquartered in Burlington, Massachusetts, the
channel broadcasts regional coverage of professional sports events throughout
New England with a major focus on Boston area teams, as well as several
original analysis, magazine and entertainment programs. It is available on
cable providers throughout Massachusetts, eastern and central Connecticut,
Vermont, Maine, New Hampshire and Rhode Island; it is also available
nationwide on satellite via DirecTV.

NBC Sports Boston originally launched on November 6, 1981 as **PRISM New
England**. A spin-off of the Philadelphia-based film and sports-oriented
premium service PRISM, it was founded by that channel's parent company,
Spectacor. Along with carrying entertainment programming, the network also
served as the cable television home for the NHL's Hartford Whalers and the
NBA's Boston Celtics, as well as various college sports teams.

In late 1982, Spectacor sold PRISM New England to Cablevision Systems
Corporation. On January 1, 1983, the network was rebranded as **SportsChannel
New England** , becoming the second network of what would become the
SportsChannel group (after SportsChannel New York).

On June 30, 1997, News Corporation and Liberty Media – which had created a new
group of regional sports networks, branded as Fox Sports Net, in November
1996, through News Corporation's partial acquisition of the Liberty-owned
Prime Network – purchased a 40% interest in Cablevision's sports properties
including the SportsChannel networks (as part of a deal that included partial
ownership of Madison Square Garden and its NBA and NHL team tenants, the New
York Knicks and New York Rangers).[3][4] Cablevision, News Corporation and
Liberty Media formed the venture National Sports Partners to run the owned-
and-operated regional networks.

As part of a gradual rebranding of most of the SportsChannel networks that
began that month (the lone exception being SportsChannel Florida, which did
not become an owned-and-operated outlet until 2000), SportsChannel New England
joined Fox Sports Net on January 28, 1998, officially rebranding as **Fox
Sports New England**.[5] That month, MediaOne acquired a 50% interest in the
network.[6] The channel was rebranded as **Fox Sports Net New England** in
2000, as part of a collective brand modification of the FSN networks under the
"Fox Sports Net" banner. That year, AT&T Corp. bought MediaOne, including its
stake in the network; in January 2001, AT&T proposed to sell the stake, along
with its interest in seven other cable networks, in a filing with the Federal
Communications Commission.[7] Comcast acquired the stake in November 2002 as
part of its merger with AT&T Broadband.[8]

The network's name was shortened to **FSN New England** in 2004, through the
de-emphasis of the "Fox Sports Net" brand by the regional networks. In later
years, the network carried selected New York Mets games in parts of
Connecticut that were not served by MSG or FSN New York (now MSG Plus), which
then produced the games.

In February 2005, Cablevision acquired News Corporation's interest in FSN New
England, FSN New York, and FSN Chicago in a trade deal in which Fox sold its
interest in Madison Square Garden and the arena's NBA and NHL team tenants in
exchange for acquiring sole ownership of FSN Florida, FSN Ohio, and FSN's
national programming and advertising division. Comcast retained its 50% stake
in FSN New England; at the time, analysts speculated that Comcast would
eventually acquire full control of the network for integration into its
Comcast SportsNet group of regional sports networks.[9]

On April 30, 2007, Comcast announced that it would purchase Cablevision's
stakes in FSN New England and FSN Bay Area from Cablevision, giving it full
ownership of FSN New England.[10] The network was rebranded as **Comcast
SportsNet New England** on October 1, 2007. CSN New England, along with the
other Comcast SportsNet-branded networks, was revamped with a new logo and
graphics package (similar to that first used by sister network Comcast
SportsNet Bay Area) in August 2008.

With Comcast's acquisition of NBCUniversal in 2011, Comcast SportsNet was also
integrated into the new NBC Sports Group, culminating with the addition of the
peacock logo and an updated graphics package to mirror that of its parent
network. That year, the network reached an extension of their rights deal with
the Boston Celtics that saw the team acquire a 20% equity stake in Comcast
SportsNet New England.[2] On August 6, 2014, satellite provider Dish Network
dropped Comcast SportsNet New England in a dispute over a proposed increase in
retransmission consent fees during carriage agreement negotiations.[11]

Comcast rebranded the network as **NBC Sports Boston** on October 2, 2017, as
part of a larger rebranding of the Comcast SportsNet networks under the NBC
Sports brand.[12]

NBC Sports Boston holds the regional cable television rights to the NBA's
Boston Celtics (the only remaining sports property that has aired its games on
the network since its launch in 1981), the New England Revolution of Major
League Soccer (which first broadcast its games on the network from 1996 to
2007, before returning to the network in 2010),[13] the Boston Cannons of
Major League Lacrosse and the Maine Red Claws of the National Basketball
Development League (which have aired its games on the network since the team's
formation in 2011).

Until 2012, Comcast SportsNet New England also carried programming distributed
nationally by Fox Sports Networks in lieu of a regional FSN affiliate. This
includes access to a variety of college sports, notably Pac-12 Conference
basketball games on various nights, as well as Saturday telecasts of football
games from the Pac-12 and Big 12 Conferences during their respective seasons.
The channel also aired studio shows produced by Fox Sports Networks (such as
_The Best Damn Sports Show Period_ and _FSN Final Score_ ), prior to the
premiere of the network's own sports news program, _SportsNet Central_ , in
December 2009. Comcast SportsNet New England, along with four other CSN
networks, dropped FSN programming on August 1, 2012, after the NBC Sports
Group could not reach a deal to continue carrying FSN programming.[14]

The network formerly carried games from the NHL's Hartford Whalers from its
launch in 1981 until the team's relocation to North Carolina (as the Carolina
Hurricanes) in 1997. The network also served as the television home of the
Boston Breakers of the United States Football League, broadcasting the team's
games for one season in 1983.

**NBC Sports Boston HD** is a high definition simulcast feed of NBC Sports
Boston, which transmits in the 1080i resolution format. The simulcast feed
broadcasts live Boston Celtics games, studio shows and original programming in
high definition.

**Major telecast station area:** New York City, Hartford/New Haven and Boston

