**NBC Sports Bay Area** (sometimes abbreviated as **NBCS Bay Area** ) is an
American regional sports network that is owned as a joint venture between
NBCUniversal and the San Francisco Giants, and operates as an affiliate of NBC
Sports Group. Headquartered in San Francisco, the channel broadcasts regional
coverage of professional sports events throughout the San Francisco Bay Area.
NBCS Bay Area's sister channel is NBC Sports California. The president of the
network is Ted Griggs.

The network was formed as a merger of two separate regional sports networks:
the **Pacific Sports Network** , which launched in July 1, 1989 as an
affiliate of the Prime Network and **SportsChannel Bay Area** , an owned-and-
operated outlet of SportsChannel that launched in April 1990 under the
ownership of Rainbow Media, the broadcasting subsidiary of Cablevision Systems
Corporation. The two networks merged in July 1991 into **SportsChannel
Pacific**.[ _citation needed_ ]

On June 30, 1997, News Corporation and Liberty Media – which formed Fox Sports
Net the year prior through News Corporation's partial acquisition of the
Liberty-owned Prime Network group of regional sports networks – purchased a
40% interest in Cablevision's sports properties including the SportsChannel
networks (as well as Madison Square Garden and its NBA and NHL team tenants,
the New York Knicks and New York Rangers);[1][2] the three companies formed
the venture National Sports Partners to run the owned-and-operated regional
networks. The channel was rebranded as **Fox Sports Bay Area** in January
1998, at which time most of the SportsChannel networks (with the exception of
SportsChannel Florida, which did not join the network until 2000) underwent a
near-groupwide rebranding as part of their integration into the Fox Sports Net
family.

The channel was then rebranded as **Fox Sports Net Bay Area** in 2000, as part
of a collective brand modification of the FSN networks under the "Fox Sports
Net" banner; subsequently in 2004, the channel shortened its name to **FSN Bay
Area** , through the networks' de-emphasis of the brand.

On April 30, 2007, Comcast purchased a 60% interest in FSN Bay Area, along
with a 50% stake in FSN New England, from Rainbow Media for $570 million.[3]
Then on December 10, the San Francisco Giants acquired a 30% stake in FSN Bay
Area,[4] with News Corporation becoming a minority partner in the network. As
a result of Comcast becoming the majority interest holder, the network (after
the sale was finalized in February 2008) was integrated into the company's own
regional sports network group Comcast SportsNet, rebranding as **Comcast
SportsNet Bay Area** on March 31, 2008.[5] CSN Bay Area became the first
Comcast SportsNet-branded network to use a logo style (utilizing Comcast's
then-universal corporate logo), based on the logo for SportsNet New York, that
was later adopted by all the other CSN regional networks on October 1, 2008.
Shortly after the rebranding in April 2008, Fox agreed to sell its interest in
CSN Bay Area to Comcast.[6]

Following Comcast's purchase of majority control of NBCUniversal, which
already owned NBC owned-and-operated station KNTV (channel 11) and Telemundo
O&O KSTS (channel 48), on April 19, 2011, the network announced plans to build
an additional set specifically for use on sports segments seen on KNTV's
newscasts. The revamp would also include in-depth interviews in addition to
providing scores and highlights, and utilize CSN Bay Area's sports anchors and
analysts.[7]

On March 22, 2017, Comcast announced that CSN Bay Area would be rebranded
**NBC Sports Bay Area** on April 2, 2017, in a move meant to "better associate
the prestigious NBC Sports legacy with the strength of our Comcast Sports
Networks' local sports coverage in Northern California."[8]

NBC Sports Bay Area holds the regional cable television rights to the San
Francisco Giants of Major League Baseball and the NBA's Golden State Warriors,
and also televises select games from Major League Soccer's San Jose
Earthquakes along with sister network Comcast SportsNet California.

The channel also broadcasts college sports sanctioned by the West Coast
Conference. Select high school sports events are also occasionally broadcast
on the network.

Until 2004, the network also broadcast games involving the NBA's Sacramento
Kings. Following the expiration of their contracts with the then-FSN Bay Area,
the owners of the Kings partnered with Comcast to create CSN Bay Area's sister
channel, Comcast SportsNet West (now NBC Sports California). CSN Bay Area was
also home to the Oakland Athletics Major League Baseball franchise until the
end of the 2008 season, when the team's games also moved to CSN California;
similarly, CSN Bay Area was the home of the NHL's San Jose Sharks until the
end of the 2008–09 NHL season when their games also moved to Comcast SportsNet
California. CSN Bay Area also televised select California Golden Bears and
Stanford Cardinal sports not on national television before the third-tier
rights to their games moved to Pac-12 Network upon its launch in 2012.

Through its partial ownership by Fox, CSN Bay Area formerly carried
programming distributed nationally for Fox Sports Networks affiliates, even
after relinquishing controlling ownership of the network to Comcast and the
Giants. This included access to a variety of college sports, notably Sunday
telecasts of men's and women's basketball games from the Atlantic Coast
Conference, Pac-12 basketball games on various nights, as well as Saturday
telecasts of football games from the Pac-12 and Big 12 Conferences during
their respective seasons. Most of that programming has shifted to Fox Sports'
national sports network Fox Sports 1 or Fox College Sports, with Comcast
SportsNet having dropped FSN-distributed programming in September 2012 after
the two parties were unable to renew their program content agreement.[9] This
arrangement was formed to secure national coverage for its lineup of
collegiate sports events. The channel also aired simulcasts of radio shows
such as _The Dan Patrick Show_ until those programs were inherited by NBC
Sports Network.

