_**Dawn**_ is Pakistan's oldest, leading and most widely read English-language
newspaper and is the country's newspaper of record.[3] It is one of the
country's three largest English-language dailies and the flagship of the Dawn
Group of Newspapers. DAWN is published by Pakistan Herald Publications, which
also owns the magazine _Herald_ , the information technology magazine _Spider_
, and the advertising marketing and media magazine _Aurora_.

It was founded by Quaid-i-Azam Mohammad Ali Jinnah in Delhi, India, on 26
October 1941 as a mouthpiece for the Muslim League. The first issue was
printed at Latifi Press on 12 October 1942.[4] The newspaper has offices in
Karachi (Sindh), Lahore (Punjab), and the federal capital Islamabad, and
representatives abroad.[5] As of 2010[update], it has a weekday circulation of
over 109,000.[6] The CEO of Dawn group is Hameed Haroon, and the current
editor of _Dawn_ is Zaffar Abbas. On 24 March 2016, it became the first
newspaper to oppose the resumption of the death penalty in Pakistan.[7]

_Dawn_ began as a weekly publication, published in New Delhi in 1941.[1] Under
the instruction of Mr. Jinnah, it became the official organ of the All India
Muslim League in Delhi, and the sole voice of the Muslims League in the
English language, reflecting and espousing the cause of the independence of
Pakistan. Jinnah summed up the paper's purpose when he stated:

"The _Dawn_ will mirror faithfully the views of Hindustan's Muslims and the
All Hindustan Muslim League in all its activities: economic, educational and
social and more particularly political, throughout the country fearlessly and
independently and while its policy will be, no doubt, mainly to advocate and
champion the cause of the Muslims and the policy and programme of the All
Hindustan Muslim League, it will not neglect the cause and welfare of the
peoples of this sub-continent generally".[8]

 _Dawn_ became a daily newspaper in October 1944 under the leadership of its
editor, Pothan Joseph, who later resigned in 1944 to take up the position of
the government's Principal Information Officer in part because of differences
with Jinnah over the Pakistan Movement. He was succeeded by Altaf Husain who
as the journal's editor, galvanised the Muslims of India for independence by
his editorials, which earned him ire of the Congress Party and of Lord
Mountbatten, the last Viceroy and Governor General of the British Raj both of
whom wanted a united India.

In 1947, senior _Dawn_ staff led by Altaf Husain set off for Karachi to launch
a local edition starting 15 August 1947.

_Dawn_ regularly carries syndicated articles from western newspapers like _The
Independent_ , _The Guardian_ , the _Los Angeles Times_ and _The Washington
Post_.

On Sundays, the weekend advertiser carries three sections namely "Ad Buzz",
"Career" & "Real Estate".[9]

After two months of test transmissions, the publishing company behind the
newspaper launched Pakistan's first 24-hour English news channel, Dawn News,
in July 2007. However, due to financial difficulties, the broadcast language
was switched from English to Urdu in May 2010.

On 19 May 2011, Dawn Media Group signed a Memorandum of Understanding with
Julian Assange, founder of WikiLeaks, for the exclusive first use in Pakistan
of all the secret US diplomatic cables related to political and other
developments in the country.[10]

An announcement printed in the newspaper and posted on the website read:

The Dawn Media Group and Julian Assange, Chief Executive of Sunshine Press
Productions, the publishing arm of WikiLeaks, have signed a Memorandum of
Understanding for the exclusive first use in Pakistan of all the secret US
diplomatic cables related to political and other developments in the
country.[10]

A _Dawn_ 's staffer's story, that was "Act against militants or face
international isolation, civilians tell military" became a big scandal due to
which Information minister Pervaiz Rashid resigned from his post, following a
preliminary investigation established a 'lapse' on his part vis-Ã -vis the
publication of the 'planted' story.[11]

