**No. 34 Squadron** is a Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) VIP transport
squadron. It operates Boeing 737 Business Jets and Bombardier Challenger 604s
from Defence Establishment Fairbairn in Canberra. The squadron was formed in
February 1942 for standard transport duties during World War II, initially
flying de Havilland DH.84 Dragons in Northern Australia. In 1943 it re-
equipped with Douglas C-47 Dakotas, which it operated in New Guinea and the
Dutch East Indies prior to disbanding in June 1946.

The unit was re-established in March 1948 as No. 34 (Communications) Squadron
at RAAF Station Mallala, South Australia, where it supported activities at the
Woomera Rocket Range before disbanding in October 1955. It was re-raised as
No. 34 (VIP) Flight in March 1956 at RAAF Base Canberra (later Fairbairn). No.
34 Flight was redesignated No. 34 (Special Transport) Squadron in July 1959,
and No. 34 Squadron in June 1963. During the 1960s it operated Dakotas,
Convair Metropolitans, Vickers Viscounts, Dassault Falcon-Mysteres, Hawker
Siddeley HS 748s, and BAC 1-11s, the last three types continuing in service
until the late 1980s. The squadron's fleet consisted solely of Dassault Falcon
900s from 1989 until 2002, when it began operating the 737 and Challenger.

No. 34 Squadron is the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) unit responsible for
the transport of VIPs, including members of the Australian government, the
Governor-General, and visiting dignitaries.[1][2] It is based at Defence
Establishment Fairbairn in Canberra, and administered by No. 84 Wing, which is
part of Air Mobility Group.[1][3] The squadron has a secondary role providing
emergency transport during humanitarian operations.[1][2] Its motto is _Eo et
redeo_ ("I Go and I Return").[4]

As of 2011, No. 34 Squadron's strength included around thirty pilots and
thirty flight attendants.[5] Captains are generally senior pilots who have
previously flown the RAAF's Boeing C-17 Globemaster, Lockheed C-130 Hercules,
or Lockheed AP-3C Orion.[6] Their co-pilots are new RAAF personnel who have
recently graduated from No. 2 Flying Training School, and the crew attendants
are posted to the squadron after completing training and a period of service
with No. 33 Squadron.[7] The squadron's VIP Operations Cell (VIPOPS) is
responsible for managing requests for VIP air transport as well as dedicated
security staff.[7] Most logistical support, including meal preparation, is
provided under commercial arrangements rather than by RAAF personnel.[8]

No. 34 Squadron operates two Boeing 737 Business Jets and three Bombardier
Challenger 604s.[2] The aircraft are leased from, and maintained by, the
Special Purpose Aircraft Business Unit of Qantas Defence Services in
Fairbairn.[9] The lease commenced in 2002 and is due to expire in
2014.[10][11] The twin-engined Boeing Business Jet (BBJ) is crewed by two
pilots and up to four flight attendants, and can carry thirty passengers.[12]
The twinjet Challenger has a crew of two pilots and one flight attendant, and
carries up to nine passengers.[13] The BBJ, which has a range of over 11,000
kilometres (6,800 mi), is generally used for long-range transport, and the
Challenger on shorter routes.[2][12] The jets are classified as "Special
Purpose Aircraft", meaning that their tasking is governed by Federal
guidelines for carrying "entitled persons" on official business. To minimise
government outlay, the jets may not be employed when available commercial
flights satisfy the timing, location and security requirements of a given
task. No. 34 Squadron conducts between 1,200 and 1,800 flights each year. A
_Schedule of Special Purpose Flights_ is tabled twice annually in Federal
Parliament.[2] VIPOPS usually assigns one of No. 34 Squadron's aircraft to
approved tasks, but other Australian Defence Force aircraft are occasionally
used for tasks not suited to the BBJ or Challenger; for instance, Prime
Minister Julia Gillard travelled to China on board a No. 33 Squadron Airbus
KC-30A Multi Role Tanker Transport in April 2013.[14]

During February and March 1942, the RAAF formed four transport units: Nos. 33,
34, 35 and 36 Squadrons.[15] No. 34 (Transport) Squadron was established on 23
February at RAAF Station Darwin, Northern Territory, four days after the city
was bombed for the first time.[4] Coming under the control of North-Western
Area Command, the squadron's initial strength was six personnel and two de
Havilland DH.84 Dragons.[4][15] They were immediately tasked with transport
duties in northern Australia.[4][16] As well as carrying freight, this
involved collecting the first Japanese prisoner of war to be captured in
Australia, a navy fighter pilot who had crashlanded during the raid on
Darwin.[4][17] One of the squadron's two officers, Flight Lieutenant J.W.
Warwick, became the first (acting) commanding officer on 2 March. The
following day, one of the Dragons was destroyed on the ground at Wyndham,
Western Australia, by enemy air attack. With its other aircraft unserviceable,
and accommodation at Darwin's civil airfield inadequate, squadron headquarters
relocated to Daly Waters Airfield on 5 March. On 14 March another Dragon was
allocated; this was joined by two Avro Ansons and two de Havilland Tiger Moths
in mid-May, by which time the squadron had moved to Batchelor Airfield. By the
end of the month, the squadron had thirty-four personnel, including six
officers. It lost one of the Tiger Moths to a bushfire on 1 July, a few days
after the plane crashlanded south of Katherine. The squadron relocated again
on 15 July, this time to Hughes Airfield. It remained at Hughes until 27
August, when it transferred to Manbulloo Airfield; it operated from Manbulloo
until it was temporarily disbanded on 13 December and its aircraft transferred
to No. 6 Communications Flight.[4]

No. 34 Squadron was re-formed on 3 January 1943 at Parafield Airport, South
Australia, from elements of No. 36 Squadron formerly based at Essendon,
Victoria.[4][18] Initially comprising ninety-six personnel and eight aircraft,
by the end of the month the squadron's strength had been reduced to seventy
personnel and three Dragons operating in South Australia and the Northern
Territory. On 11 March one of the Dragons was destroyed on takeoff at
Parafield, causing two deathsâ€”No. 34 Squadron's first fatalities. Another
Dragon was lost in a fire after it crashlanded near Tennant Creek in April.[4]
Beginning in May 1943, the Dragons were augmented by Douglas C-47 Dakotas,
giving the squadron a total strength of three Dakotas and two Dragons by the
following month.[4][16] By July, No. 34 Squadron was operating five Dakotas,
which had fully replaced the Dragons, and in August its strength stood at
seven Dakotas and 153 personnel, including forty-seven officers.[4] It
subsequently received an Airspeed Oxford and a Douglas DC-2, and began making
supply drops and medical evacuations as far north as Port Moresby, New
Guinea.[4][16] The squadron had its busiest month in May 1944, transporting
almost 1,900 passengers and over 1,000,000 pounds (450,000 kg) of cargo. On 1
June it became the first operational RAAF squadron to have personnel of the
Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force (WAAAF) in its ranks, a contingent made
up of an officer and twenty airwomen.[4] The WAAAF had been formed in 1941 and
eventually made up thirty-one per cent of RAAF ground staff; its members were
primarily employed in technical trades and were not permitted to serve in
combat theatres.[19][20]

October 1944 saw a detachment of the squadron operating from Cape York in Far
North Queensland to bases in the Dutch East Indies. Additional detachments
were located at Townsville, Queensland, and Coomalie Creek, Northern
Territory.[16] In February 1945, No. 34 Squadron commenced a relocation to
Morotai in the Dutch East Indies, under the control of the Australian First
Tactical Air Force, and was fully established at its new base by mid-
April.[4][21] The squadron supported the invasion of Borneo, and its Dakotas
were the first Allied aircraft to land at Labuan and Tarakan after the islands
were captured. It remained at Morotai until the end of the war, at which time
it became involved in repatriating Australian former prisoners of war from
Singapore, and then in courier flights supporting the formation of the British
Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan.[4][16] No. 34 Squadron returned to
Australia between January and March 1946 and disbanded at RAAF Station
Richmond, New South Wales, on 6 June.[4]

The squadron was re-established at RAAF Station Mallala, South Australia, on 1
March 1948, when No. 2 (Communications) Squadron was renamed No. 34
(Communications) Squadron.[22] It operated as a VIP transport, courier and
reconnaissance unit, primarily in support of the Woomera rocket range, focal
point of the Anglo-Australian Long Range Weapons Project during the Cold
War.[23][24] No. 34 (Communications) Squadron flew the only Vickers Viking to
be taken on strength by the RAAF, and was also the only RAAF squadron to
operate the Bristol Freighter.[25][26] Three Freighters were taken on strength
in April and May 1949, and a fourth in September 1951; one was lost with all
three crew members in a crash near Mallala on 25 November 1953 after its wing
failed in flight.[26][27] The squadron also operated Percival Prince, Auster,
Dakota and Anson aircraft, undertaking regular transport duties and disaster
relief along with its Woomera support work before disbanding at Mallala on 28
October 1955.[16]

No. 34 (VIP) Flight was established at RAAF Base Canberra on 12 March 1956,
and charged with the safe carriage of the Governor-General, senior Australian
politicians and military officers, and visiting foreign dignitaries. It was
formed from the VIP Flight of No. 36 Squadron, under No. 86 (Transport)
Wing.[22][28] The VIP Flight had absorbed the RAAF's Governor-General's Flight
in October 1950.[29] In its first year of operation, No. 34 Flight carried the
Duke of Edinburgh on his tour of Australia.[22] It was equipped with two
Convair 440 Metropolitans, as well as Dakotas.[16][30] The flight remained in
Canberra when No. 86 Wing relocated to Richmond in 1958. On 1 July 1959, it
was re-formed as No. 34 (Special Transport) Squadron, leaving the control of
No. 86 Wing to become an independent unit directly administered by Home
Command and tasked by RAAF Base Canberra.[22][28] "Possibly because of the
rank of its clients", contended the official history of the post-war Air
Force, the squadron maintained higher standards than other transport units,
adopting some procedures from the civil aviation world. It also benefitted
from the personal interest of senior officials when it came to upgrading its
equipment, though this had some negative aspects. The acquisition of the
Metropolitans, the first pressurised aircraft in the VIP fleet, was organised
by Minister for Air Athol Townley without any advance discussion with the
RAAF. Although the Air Force raised performance and safety concerns, the
type's entry into service was a _fait accompli_ , and it remained on strength
for twelve years.[31] Until the early 1960s, the VIP unit also operated two de
Havilland Vampire jets and two CAC Winjeel trainers to allow staff officers at
Canberra's Department of Air to maintain their flying proficiency.[32]

No. 34 (Special Transport) Squadron's home in Canberra was renamed RAAF Base
Fairbairn in March 1962, and the unit was redesignated No. 34 Squadron on 13
June 1963.[22][33] That year, the squadron carried Queen Elizabeth II for the
first time.[34] In October 1964, two second-hand Vickers Viscount turboprop
transports were obtained to supplement the Dakotas and Convairs; the two
piston-engine types were withdrawn after the delivery of two Hawker Siddeley
HS 748s beginning in April 1967 and three Dassault Falcon 20 jets (known as
Mystere in RAAF service) in June. Two BAC 1-11 jets joined the squadron on 19
January 1968, and the two Viscounts were retired in March the following
year.[16][35] The wholesale re-equipment of the VIP fleet in the late 1960s
was controversial, and questions were raised in Parliament regarding its cost
and operations. The so-called "VIP affair" led to more stringent guidelines
governing No. 34 Squadron's tasking, requiring approval for flights to be made
by the British Royal Family, the Governor-General, the Prime Minister, or the
Minister for Air. Eligibility criteria were also codified, and potential
passengers included Federal ministers, opposition leaders, "individuals of
similar status and importance visiting Australia", two-star officers and
above, and other dignitaries of similar status.[36] During the 1970s one of
No. 34 Squadron's BAC 1-11s experienced an engine failure over the Tasman Sea
while carrying Prime Minister Gough Whitlam to New Zealand. The aircraft made
a safe landing in Australia, but the incident led the RAAF to investigate
using three- or four-engined aircraft for future VIP flights involving long
over-water legs.[37] The government eventually purchased two Boeing 707s from
Qantas to perform long-range VIP flights and to improve the RAAF's strategic
transport capabilities. Entering service in 1979, they joined the newly
established No. 33 Flight (later No. 33 Squadron) in 1981.[38] More 707s were
acquired between 1983 and 1988, and four were converted for air-to-air
refuelling in the early 1990s.[39] In 1984, No. 34 Squadron was awarded the
Gloucester Cup for its proficiency.[22]

The squadron again became part of No. 86 Wing in June 1988, though its tasking
continued to be controlled by the Governor-General, the Prime Minister, and
the Minister for Defence.[40] Commencing in September 1989, the twinjet
Mysteres and BAC 1-11s were replaced by five trijet Dassault Falcon 900s
leased from Hawker Pacific, the first time the RAAF had leased aircraft from a
commercial company.[37][41] The two HS 748s were transferred to the newly
formed No. 32 Squadron at RAAF Base East Sale, Victoria.[42] Responsibility
for servicing the Falcon 900s was shared by No. 34 Squadron and Hawker
Pacific, the latter performing heavy maintenance.[43] In an unusual operation
for the squadron, one of the Falcons was dispatched to Jordan in September
1990 to evacuate thirteen Australian citizens who had been held hostage in
Iraq.[44] On 21 December 1992, a Falcon 900 became the first RAAF aircraft to
take part in United Nations peacekeeping efforts in Somalia, when it departed
RAAF Base Amberley, Queensland, with a team of Australian Army personnel to
reconnoitre the theatre of operations.[45] The unit received a commendation
from the Chief of the Defence Force, General Peter Gration, shortly before his
retirement in 1993.[46] In January 1998, No. 84 Wing was organised as a
special transport wing under Air Lift Group (renamed Air Mobility Group in
April 2014).[3][47] The term "special transport" referred to activities not
directly related to army support, such as carrying VIPs.[48] Headquartered at
Richmond, No. 84 Wing took control of Nos. 32, 33 and 34 Squadrons.[47][49] A
flight by one of No. 34 Squadron's Falcons preceded INTERFET operations in
East Timor in 1999, carrying senior Australian military and diplomatic staff
to Dili on a goodwill mission.[50]

The Falcon 900s were replaced by two Boeing 737 Business Jets and three
Bombardier Challenger 604s in July 2002. The new aircraft also replaced the
two Boeing 707s operated by No. 33 Squadron in the VIP transport role.[51][52]
The 707s had permitted journalists to travel with the Prime Minister on
international flights, and in replacing the bigger jets with 737s the Liberal
government of the time determined that media contingents covering VIP trips
should travel on civil aircraft. This decision led to controversy in 2007,
after the crash of a Garuda airliner killed four Australian government
officials and a journalist travelling in connection with a visit to Indonesia
by Foreign Minister Alexander Downer, who had flown on a Challenger.[53] No.
34 Squadron and Qantas Defence Services marked 20,000 incident-free flying
hours with the 737s and Challengers on 21 October 2008.[54] The following year
saw further controversy when Prime Minister Kevin Rudd had to apologise for
remarks to a cabin attendant over the meal he was served on one of the
jets.[6] In 2011, the squadron provided VIP transport during tours of
Australia by Queen Elizabeth, Prince William, and Frederik and Mary of
Denmark, as well as support for US President Barack Obama's visit to
Canberra.[34] It also flew senior government and military personnel in support
of relief efforts during the Queensland floods, and was again awarded the
Gloucester Cup for proficiency.[1] No. 34 Squadron celebrated its 70th
anniversary at Parliament House, Canberra, on 18 February 2012; the following
day, a memorial to its first fatalities in March 1942 was unveiled at
Fairbairn.[55][56] The lease on its aircraft is due to expire in 2014, and
they may be replaced with new types.[8]

On 13 October 2017, No. 34 Squadron was transferred from No. 84 Wing to No. 86
Wing. This change was made to place the unit under the same headquarters as
No. 33 Squadron, whose Airbus KC-30A aircraft are gaining a VIP role.[57]

