**No. 38 Squadron** was a Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) transport and
training unit active between 1943 and 2018. It was formed on 15 September 1943
and saw service during World War II transporting supplies and personnel
between Australia and the combat zones in New Guinea and Borneo, using Douglas
Dakota aircraft. Following the war, the squadron conducted regular courier
flights between Australia and Japan in 1947 and 1948. No. 38 Squadron was
deployed to Singapore from 1950 to 1952, supplying Commonwealth forces engaged
in the Malayan Emergency and undertaking courier flights across Asia. In 1954
it became responsible for training RAAF personnel to operate Dakotas.

After being re-equipped with de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou in 1964, No. 38
Squadron served as the RAAF's operational conversion unit for the type and
also conducted transport tasks within Australia and its territories.
Throughout Australia's involvement in the Vietnam War, it prepared aircrew for
operational service with No. 35 Squadron, and maintained a detachment in Papua
and New Guinea to provide pilots with experience flying in tropical
conditions. A Caribou was deployed to Pakistan from 1975 to 1978 to support
United Nations peacekeepers, and detachments were established within Australia
during the 1980s to provide search and rescue capabilities and work with
Australian Army units. From 1999 until 2001, a detachment was deployed to East
Timor as part of the Australian-led peacekeeping force in the newly
independent nation. No. 38 Squadron continued to operate Caribou after No. 35
Squadron was disbanded in 2000, though the age of the aircraft increasingly
affected its operations.

Following the retirement of the Caribou from service in 2009, No. 38 Squadron
was re-equipped with eight Beechcraft King Air 350 aircraft. The squadron was
stationed at RAAF Base Townsville, Queensland, and was responsible for
training RAAF pilots to operate King Airs, and performing light transport and
tasks. It was also believed to have a ground surveillance capability. The
squadron disbanded on 29 November 2018, its aircraft and roles being
transferred to No. 32 Squadron.

No. 38 Squadron was formed as a transport unit at RAAF Base Richmond near
Sydney on 15 September 1943. Equipped with Lockheed Hudsons, the squadron
conducted its first operation on 17 December, when one of its aircraft flew
from Richmond to RAAF Base Darwin.[2] During the period No. 38 Squadron was
equipped with Hudsons, it operated only within Australia.[4]

The squadron's activities expanded in early 1944, when its obsolescent Hudsons
were replaced with more capable Douglas Dakota transports.[4][5] It received
its first Dakota on 3 March 1944, and was completely equipped with the type by
the end of May.[2] While the squadron continued to fly to locations within
Australia after receiving Dakotas, it also began transporting supplies to
Allied forces fighting the Japanese in western New Guinea. During return
flights from New Guinea, the Dakotas typically carried wounded personnel to
Australia for treatment.[6] In October 1944, No. 38 Squadron was given the
additional task of supporting the RAAF's Paratroop Training Unit at Richmond.
The squadron moved to RAAF Station Archerfield near Brisbane in early December
1944, but continued to maintain a detachment at Richmond. By this time No. 38
Squadron was mainly tasked with transporting supplies to the battle zone in
New Guinea, which included making supply drops to Australian Army units in the
field and evacuating casualties to the mainland. From 17 July 1945, the
squadron maintained a detachment at Morotai Island, dropping supplies to Army
units fighting in Borneo. No. 38 Squadron's only loss during World War II was
a Dakota that crashed on a mountain in western New Guinea while flying between
Biak and Morotai; the wreckage of this aircraft was not located until 1970.[6]

After the war, No. 38 Squadron flew into Singapore, Bangkok and locations in
Borneo to evacuate released Australian prisoners of war. The squadron also
transported other service personnel back to Australia until 1946 as part of
the demobilisation of the Australian military.[4][6] During May 1946, three of
No. 38 Squadron's Dakotas were assigned the unusual task of flying 25 tonnes
of pig bristles from Chongqing in China to Hong Kong, from where the bristles
were shipped to Australia. This mission, which was designated "Operation Pig
Bristle", took two weeks and sought to rectify a shortage of paint brushes
that was hindering the Australian construction industry.[6][7]

No. 38 Squadron relocated to RAAF Station Schofields near Sydney on 15 August
1946. It became part of No. 86 Wing, along with Nos. 36 and 37 Squadrons,
which also operated Dakotas, and No. 486 (Maintenance) Squadron, which
serviced the wing's flying units.[8][9] Commencing on 22 January 1947, one of
No. 38 Squadron's main responsibilities was to conduct thrice-weekly courier
flights to Japan to support the Australian element of the British Commonwealth
Occupation Force. These flights were the longest regular air route serviced by
twin-engined aircraft at the time, and took several days. The courier flights
continued until 13 January 1948, after which chartered Qantas aircraft were
used to support the force in Japan.[4][6] In August 1948, five of No. 38
Squadron's air crews were dispatched to Europe where, as members of the RAAF
Squadron Berlin Air Lift, they participated in the international efforts to
fly supplies into Berlin during the Soviet blockade of the city. These
personnel remained in Europe for 12 months, and their absence greatly
disrupted No. 38 Squadron's operations.[4][10] Overall, twenty members of No.
86 Wing were sent to Europe; the resulting shortage of personnel forced Nos.
36 and 38 Squadrons to operate for a period as a single unit, all flying hours
being attributed to No. 38 Squadron in official records.[11] No. 86 Wing moved
to Richmond between 22 June and 1 July 1949.[12]

In 1950, No. 38 Squadron was selected to form part of the Australian force
assigned to the Commonwealth Far East Air Force. As an element of this force,
the Australian Government agreed for the unit to be tasked with courier
flights across Asia and providing support for the British-led
counterinsurgency operations in Malaya.[13] The squadron's advance party
arrived at RAF Changi in Singapore on 19 June 1950, and all of its personnel
and eight Dakotas were operational there by 6 July. While in Malaya the
squadron came under the command of No. 90 (Composite) Wing, along with the
Avro Lincoln-equipped No. 1 Squadron.[14] Half the squadron's aircrew were
veterans of the Berlin Airlift, but none had any direct experience of tropical
environments. No. 38 Squadron began flying transport missions in Malaya in
early July, with British and New Zealand pilots accompanying its aircrews
during the first two weeks of operations to help them become familiar with
local conditions.[15] From July 1950 until February 1951, No. 38 Squadron's
main task was to conduct courier flights to Borneo, Ceylon, Hong Kong,
Indonesia, Japan and the Philippines, and these remained an important
responsibility throughout the period it was based at Singapore.[16] Following
the outbreak of the Korean War, the squadron flew British troops and supplies
from Singapore to Japan and Korea, and four of No. 38 Squadron's Dakotas were
transferred to No. 30 Communication Unit in Japan during November
1950.[14][17]

After losing half its strength, No. 38 Squadron remained at Changi and
conducted supply and aeromedical evacuation flights throughout Malaya to
support the British-led forces there. The squadron's aircraft were also
occasionally used to mark targets ahead of bombing raids and to drop
propaganda leaflets. From April to July 1951, No. 38 Squadron and an attached
flight from No. 41 Squadron RNZAF was stationed at RAF Kuala Lumpur, and was
the main unit tasked with dropping supplies to Commonwealth forces in the
field. The squadron made another deployment to Kuala Lumpur between November
1951 and February 1952.[14] In February 1952, No. 38 Squadron successfully
parachuted 54 personnel from the British 22nd Special Air Service Regiment
into a remote area near the Malaya-Thailand border.[18]

Supporting the Australian units in Korea placed heavy demands on the RAAF's
transport force, which was too small to fully meet its domestic and
international responsibilities, and it became increasingly difficult to
sustain the four Dakotas in Malaya during 1952. As a result, the Australian
Government decided in September that year to return the squadron to
Australia.[14][19] No. 38 Squadron left Changi for Richmond on 8 December.[10]
The squadron's only fatality during the deployment was an airman who was
killed when the No. 110 Squadron RAF Dakota he was co-piloting crashed during
a flight between Changi and Saigon on 31 August 1950.[14][20]

After returning to Richmond, No. 38 Squadron was mainly tasked with routine
transport duties.[10] The squadron also occasionally provided aircraft for
CSIRO rainmaking experiments.[21] During the 1950s and early 1960s, No. 38
Squadron developed a reputation as a "cowboy" unit with lax flying standards.
The squadron did not conduct proper conversion courses, and new Dakota pilots
received only ad-hoc instruction on the type while serving as the co-pilot
during operational tasks.[22] On 8 March 1953, No. 38 Squadron absorbed No. 36
Squadron's Dakotas, after which No. 30 Transport Unit (previously No. 30
Communication Unit) in Japan was renamed No. 36 Squadron. From late March
until September 1954, No. 38 Squadron conducted VIP flights out of RAAF
Station Canberra. In November that year, it was renamed the Transport Training
Squadron and became responsible for instructing new Dakota crews and RAAF air
movements personnel. It resumed its previous name on 13 June 1963.[10]

No. 38 Squadron was re-equipped with new de Havilland Canada DHC-4 Caribou
tactical transport aircraft during 1964. In January 1964 the unit's commanding
officer, five other pilots and three navigators undertook conversion training
on the type in Canada. At the completion of this course the personnel flew the
RAAF's first three Caribous from Toronto to RAAF Base Richmond between 17
March and 22 April.[23] The process of fully converting No. 38 Squadron to
Caribous was delayed by the government's decision to deploy several of the
aircraft to Vietnam; at the time this decision was made, in June 1964, the
squadron had received six of its planned allocation of nine aircraft, and the
next batch of three aircraft was sent directly to Vietnam.[24] No. 38 Squadron
was the last operational RAAF squadron to fly Dakotas, though several other
units did so until the 1990s.[25][26] After receiving its Caribous, No. 38
Squadron's main role was to train aircrews for operational service with the
RAAF Transport Flight Vietnam (later redesignated No. 35 Squadron).[10][21] On
1 July 1964, one of the squadron's Caribous suffered severe damage when it
made a crash landing at HMAS _Albatross_; this aircraft was subsequently
written off and its fuselage used for training purposes by the Army's 1st
Commando Regiment.[27] The squadron became an independent unit under
Headquarters RAAF Base Richmond in August that year, following the disbandment
of No. 86 Wing.[10][28] On 13 October 1965, Detachment A of No. 38 Squadron
began operations from Port Moresby in the Territory of Papua and New Guinea,
equipped with two Caribous.[29][30] One of the detachment's tasks was to give
Caribou pilots experience in tropical and mountainous conditions, and all
aircraft captains were required to complete at least one two-month deployment
to Port Moresby before serving with No. 35 Squadron in Vietnam.[31] In
addition to its training role, No. 38 Squadron undertook transport flights in
and around Australia, taking part when required in relief efforts following
natural disasters.[21]

The squadron undertook two operational deployments during the mid-1970s. From
March 1975 until November 1978 Detachment B, comprising a single Caribou and
support staff, was stationed at Rawalpindi, Pakistan, and transported
personnel and supplies for the United Nations Military Observer Group in India
and Pakistan.[29][32] From August to October 1975, a No. 38 Squadron Caribou
was assigned to transport Red Cross supplies and personnel from Darwin to East
Timor after a civil war broke out in that country. On 4 September that year
this aircraft was hijacked by East Timorese soldiers, who forced the pilot to
fly 54 refugees to Darwin; it remains the only RAAF aircraft ever to have been
hijacked.[21][33] Detachment A was no longer required after Papua New Guinea
achieved independence from Australia and established its own defence force,
and the unit was disbanded on 17 January 1976.[29][34] Three Caribous were
lost while operating with the detachment; A4-202 crashed near Porgera on 3
June 1965, A4-147 was written off after it landed short of the runway at
Tapini Airport on 6 October 1968 and A4-233 was destroyed when it crashed at
Kudjeru Gap on 28 August 1972.[35] The last of these crashes caused the deaths
of 25 aircrew and passengers, making it the RAAF's worst peacetime disaster;
21 of the people killed were high school students returning from an army cadet
camp.[36][37][38] Following the end of its permanent presence at Port Moresby,
No. 38 Squadron continued to fly periodic training sorties in Papua New
Guinea.[5] During the 1980s, detachments of No. 38 Squadron were established
at RAAF Base Darwin and RAAF Base Pearce near Perth to provide these regions
with a search-and-rescue capability and to exercise with Army units.[39] The
Pearce detachment was nicknamed "Blackduck Airlines".[40]

No. 38 Squadron moved from Richmond to RAAF Base Amberley, west of Brisbane,
in October 1992.[29] At this time the squadron continued to be responsible for
all Caribou conversion training, as well as conducting tactical transport
operations.[41] The permanent detachment of No. 38 Squadron aircraft to RAAF
Base Pearce ceased in 1999, and Detachment B of the squadron was established
at RAAF Base Townsville in North Queensland during 2000.[36][41][42] From 1999
until early 2001, elements of No. 38 Squadron, designated No. 86 Wing
Detachment C, were stationed in East Timor and supported the international
peacekeeping force which had been deployed there to end the violence that had
broken out following a successful referendum on independence conducted in
August 1999. At its peak strength, four Caribous were assigned to the
detachment.[41][43] The air and ground crew deployed to East Timor endured
difficult living conditions until their accommodation and recreation
facilities were upgraded in mid-2000, and the pilots were regularly required
to fly into poorly maintained air strips.[44] Despite the age of the Caribous
and shortages of spare parts, Detachment C's ground crew managed to maintain a
high aircraft serviceability rate.[45] In 2000 No. 35 Squadron was
deactivated, leaving No. 38 Squadron the RAAF's sole Caribou operator.[46] By
September 2002, No. 38 Squadron was equipped with 14 Caribous.[43] In July
2003, two aircraft were deployed to the Solomon Islands as part of the
Regional Assistance Mission to Solomon Islands peacekeeping force. Both
Caribous were based at Honiara International Airport, and a detachment
remained in the country until July 2004.[47][48] All of No. 38 Squadron moved
to RAAF Base Townsville during 2008.[49]

By the late 2000s the Caribous were becoming difficult to maintain, and were
no longer capable of operating in war zones as they lacked electronic warfare
systems and other forms of self-protection. As a result, it was decided in
late 2008 to retire the aircraft and replace them with Beechcraft King Air
350s on an interim basis until another tactical transport entered service.[50]
The Caribous were gradually retired from May 2009, the last leaving service on
27 November that year when A4-140 was flown to Canberra and handed over to the
Australian War Memorial for preservation.[51][52] By the time the aircraft
were retired, No. 38 Squadron had been operating Caribous for 45 years.[53]

Three King Air 350s were transferred to No. 38 Squadron from the Army's 173rd
Surveillance Squadron on 20 November 2009, and deliveries of a further five
newly built aircraft were completed in July 2010.[54][55] At least one of the
Army aircraft is believed to have been fitted with ground surveillance
sensors, and this capacity was retained after it was transferred to the Air
Force.[56] No. 38 Squadron's King Airs were initially operated by Army
personnel, who were given the choice of transferring to the RAAF or converting
to helicopters at the end of their posting. The other No. 38 pilots were
converted to the type at the Army's Oakey Army Aviation Centre, but the
squadron began conducting its own conversion courses after the second batch of
five aircraft were delivered.[57] No. 38 Squadron marked its 70th anniversary
in 2013.[58][59]

In March 2015 two No. 38 Squadron King Airs were deployed to Vanuatu as part
of Australia's aid effort following Cyclone Pam. The aircraft were used to
conduct flights over the affected areas to assess the extent of the damage,
and also evacuated Australian and New Zealand citizens.[60][61] All of the
RAAF's King Airs were grounded from 30 June 2016 after the hazardous chemical
strontium chromate was detected in the aircraft; in the period immediately
before the grounding No. 38 Squadron had been involved in flying politicians
during the 2016 federal election. The King Airs began to return to service on
4 August that year after being cleaned.[62][63] As part of its budget for the
2016-17 financial year, the Australian Government announced that Intelligence,
Surveillance, Target Acquisition, Reconnaissance, Electronic Warfare equipment
would be acquired for three of No. 38 Squadron's King Airs. This equipment
comprised roll-on/roll-off kits, and was scheduled to be delivered during the
financial year.[57]

In February 2016 it was reported that the RAAF was considering consolidating
its two squadrons equipped with King Airs into a single squadron located at
RAAF Base East Sale.[64] No. 38 Squadron began to be reduced in size during
that year.[65] In February 2018 the Department of Defence announced that No.
38 Squadron would relocate to RAAF Base East Sale later that year.[66][67] The
September 2018 edition of _Australian Aviation_ reported that No. 38 Squadron
was to be disbanded in November 2018.[68]

No. 38 Squadron was disbanded at a ceremony at RAAF Base Townsville on 29
November 2018. This marked the end of 75 years continuous service, the longest
period for any RAAF squadron. Its aircraft and role, including the
Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition, Reconnaissance, Electronic
Warfare function, was transferred to No. 32 Squadron.[69][70][71]

In its final role, No. 38 Squadron was responsible for providing conversion
training on the King Air and conducting light transport operations. As of
2014, the unit had a strength of 60 RAAF personnel as well as 25 aircraft
maintenance contractors from Hawker Pacific.[72] It was organised into two
flights; A Flight undertook transport operations, and B Flight was responsible
for delivering training courses.[73] As of 2018, the squadron's Intelligence,
Surveillance, Target Acquisition, Reconnaissance, Electronic Warfare
capabilities were classified, but were reported to include a communications
relay function. The aircraft had also been used as a platform for aerial
photography after being transferred to the RAAF; this has included taking
photographs to be used in map making.[69] Along with Nos. 33 and 36 Squadrons,
No. 38 Squadron formed part of No. 86 Wing.[74]

The RAAF has been satisfied with the King Air's performance in the light
transport role, though the aircraft cannot be deployed into combat
areas.[1][75] No. 38 Squadron often operated with the Army's Townsville-based
3rd Brigade, as well as the 51st Battalion, Far North Queensland Regiment,
which conducts operational patrols across Far North Queensland during
peacetime.[1] The unit was also frequently tasked with transporting senior
politicians and other VIPs.[36] The King Airs often operated in Papua New
Guinea, as well as other parts of the Asia-Pacific region.[58]

