**No. 77 Squadron** is a Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) squadron
headquartered at RAAF Base Williamtown, New South Wales. It is controlled by
No. 81 Wing, and equipped with McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet multi-role
fighters. The squadron was formed at RAAF Station Pearce, Western Australia,
in March 1942 and saw action in the South West Pacific theatre of World War
II, operating Curtis P-40 Kittyhawks. After the war, it re-equipped with North
American P-51 Mustangs and deployed to Japan as part of the British
Commonwealth Occupation Force. The squadron was about to return to Australia
when the Korean War broke out in June 1950, after which it joined United
Nations forces supporting South Korea. It converted from Mustangs to Gloster
Meteor jets between April and July 1951 and remained in Korea until October
1954, claiming five MiG-15s and over five thousand buildings and vehicles
destroyed during the war for the loss of almost sixty aircraft, mainly to
ground fire.

The squadron re-equipped with CAC Sabres at Williamtown in November 1956. Two
years later it transferred to RAAF Butterworth in Malaya to join the air
campaign against communist guerrillas in the last stages of the Emergency. The
squadron remained at Butterworth during the 1960s, providing regional air
defence during the _Konfrontasi_ between Indonesia and Malaysia. It returned
to Williamtown in early 1969 to re-equip with Dassault Mirage III supersonic
jet fighters. No. 77 Squadron began converting to Hornets in June 1987. It
supplied a detachment of four aircraft to the American base on Diego Garcia in
2001–02, supporting the war in Afghanistan, and deployed to the Middle East as
part of the military intervention against ISIL in 2015–16. Along with its
Hornets, the squadron briefly operated Pilatus PC-9s in the forward air
control role in the early 2000s. The RAAF plans to replace its Hornets with
Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II fighters commencing in 2018, and No. 77
Squadron is scheduled to convert to the new type in 2021.

No. 77 Squadron is located at RAAF Base Williamtown, New South Wales, and
controlled by No. 81 Wing, which is part of Air Combat Group.[3] No. 81 Wing
maintains three fighter squadrons for offensive and defensive counter-air
operations.[4] As well as air-to-air combat, No. 77 Squadron is tasked with
land strike, close air support and maritime strike missions. Its staff
includes maintenance, supply and other support personnel.[3] The unit motto is
"Swift to Destroy" and the crest features an oriental temple lion, a legacy of
No. 77 Squadron's role in the Korean War. Nicknamed the "grumpy monkey", the
lion represents "a defender of peace, which, when disturbed, is swift to
destroy".[5][6]

The squadron operates McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet multi-role fighters, the
first of which was delivered in June 1987.[3][7] The twin-engined Hornet is
armed with a 20 mm cannon and can carry short- and medium-range air-to-air
missiles and a variety of guided and unguided air-to-surface ordnance.[8][9]
It can be refuelled in flight by the RAAF's Airbus KC-30A Multi Role Tanker
Transports.[10] No. 77 Squadron primarily operates the single-seat F/A-18A
Hornet; each Hornet squadron also operates one or two F/A-18Bs, a two-seat
model used for pilot conversion.[8] Squadron staff are responsible for day-to-
day servicing and some heavy maintenance tasks. Other heavy maintenance is
carried out by an industry coalition contracted through Boeing.[11] No. 77
Squadron regularly undertakes exercises with air forces from South-East Asia,
New Zealand and the United States.[3][12]

As the Japanese advanced in the South West Pacific during early 1942, the RAAF
hurriedly established three fighter units—Nos. 75, 76 and 77
Squadrons—equipped with Curtiss P-40E Kittyhawks recently delivered from the
United States.[13] No. 77 Squadron was formed at RAAF Station Pearce, Western
Australia, on 16 March, with a complement of three officers and 100 men.
Temporarily commanded by Squadron Leader D. F. Forsyth, the unit was initially
responsible for the defence of Perth.[14][15] Squadron Leader Dick Cresswell
assumed command on 20 April.[7] The squadron transferred to Batchelor Airfield
near Darwin, Northern Territory, in August, the first RAAF fighter unit to be
stationed in the area.[14][16] Until this time, air defence over Darwin had
been provided by the P-40s flown by the USAAF's 49th Fighter Group.[17] No. 77
Squadron moved to another of Darwin's satellite airfields, Livingstone, in
September.[16][18] Among its pilots was John Gorton, future Prime Minister of
Australia.[19] No. 77 Squadron saw action defending Darwin from Japanese air
raids and claimed its first aerial victory just after 5 a.m. on 23 November
1942, when Cresswell destroyed a Mitsubishi "Betty" bomber.[14][20] It was the
first "kill" for an Australian squadron over the mainland, and the first night
victory over Australia.[20] As of 24 December, the unit's strength was twenty-
four Kittyhawks.[21]

In February 1943, concurrent with No. 1 Wing and its three Supermarine
Spitfire squadrons becoming operational in the Darwin area, No. 77 Squadron
was transferred to Milne Bay in New Guinea.[22][23] Along with Nos. 6, 75 and
100 Squadrons it came under the control of the newly formed No. 71 Wing, which
was part of No. 9 Operational Group, the RAAF's main mobile formation in the
South West Pacific Area.[24][25] No. 77 Squadron registered its first daytime
victory on 11 April, when a Kittyhawk shot down a Mitsubishi Zero taking part
in a raid on Allied shipping near Buna. Three days later the Japanese attacked
Milne Bay; the squadron claimed four bombers and a fighter for the loss of one
Kittyhawk.[14][26] By this time, Allied headquarters had finalised plans for a
drive north to the Philippines involving heavy attacks on Rabaul and the
occupation of territory in New Guinea, New Britain and the Solomon
Islands.[27]

No. 77 Squadron began moving to Goodenough Island in May 1943, and was fully
established and ready for operations by 15 June.[28] As Japanese fighter
opposition was limited, the squadron took part in several ground-attack
missions in New Britain, armed with incendiary and general-purpose bombs, a
practice that had been employed by Kittyhawk units in the Middle East.[28][29]
During one such raid on 2 August, Cresswell's designated successor as
commanding officer, Flight Lieutenant Daryl Sproule, was forced to crash-land
on a beach and was captured and executed by the Japanese.[29][30] Cresswell
remained in command until Squadron Leader "Buster" Brown took over on 20
August.[5][7] Japanese fighter strength in New Britain and New Guinea
increased in September and October, and eight of No. 77 Squadron's Kittyhawks
were briefly detached to Nadzab as escorts for the CAC Boomerangs of No. 4
Squadron, which were supporting the 7th Australian Division.[31]

In January 1944, No. 77 Squadron took part in the two largest raids mounted by
the RAAF to that time, each involving over seventy aircraft attacking targets
in New Britain.[32] It was subsequently assigned to Los Negros in the
Admiralty Islands, joining Nos. 76 and 79 Squadrons under No. 73 Wing.[33] No.
77 Squadron's ground party went ashore at Los Negros on 6 March, in the middle
of a firefight with Japanese forces.[34] Fourteen of the squadron's Kittyhawks
arrived a week later, and another ten on 28 March.[35] Their primary duty was
providing air cover for Allied shipping, though no Japanese aircraft were
encountered; they also flew ground-attack missions in support of US troops on
Manus Island.[14][36] Following the capture of the Admiralties, which
completed the isolation of Rabaul, No. 77 Squadron remained with No. 73 Wing
on garrison duty at Los Negros from May to July 1944.[37][38]

Between 13 August and 14 September 1944, the squadron transferred to Noemfoor
in western New Guinea to join Nos. 76 and 82 Squadrons as part of No. 81 Wing
under No. 10 Operational Group (later the Australian First Tactical Air
Force), which had taken over the mobile role previously performed by No. 9
Group and was supporting the American landings along the north coast of New
Guinea.[25][38] Cresswell, now a wing commander, arrived for his second tour
of duty as commanding officer on 26 September.[14] Operating P-40N Kittyhawks,
No. 77 Squadron bombed Japanese positions on the Vogelkop Peninsula in October
and on Halmahera in November.[14][39] Cresswell handed over command in March
1945.[40] The squadron moved to Morotai on 13 April and conducted ground-
attack sorties over the Dutch East Indies until 30 June, when it redeployed
with No. 81 Wing to Labuan to support the 9th Australian Division in North
Borneo until hostilities ended in August 1945.[14][41] The squadron's tally of
aerial victories during the war was seven aircraft destroyed and four
"probables", for the loss of eighteen pilots killed.[42]

No. 77 Squadron began re-equipping with North American P-51 Mustangs at Labuan
in September 1945.[16][43] In the wake of Japan's surrender, No. 81 Wing
became part of Australia's contribution to the British Commonwealth Occupation
Force (BCOF). No. 77 Squadron was the last of the wing's three flying units to
deploy to Japan, arriving at Bofu, a former kamikaze base, on 21 March
1946.[44] No. 481 (Maintenance) Squadron provided technical service for the
Mustangs.[45] Occupation duties proved uneventful, the main operational task
being surveillance patrols, but units maintained an intensive training regime
and undertook combined exercises with other Allied forces.[16][46] Many RAAF
personnel were accompanied to Japan by their families.[47]

No. 81 Wing transferred to Iwakuni in April 1948, the same month that the
Federal government decided to reduce Australia's contribution to BCOF,
retaining only No. 77 Squadron in Japan.[44][48] Wing headquarters and No. 481
Squadron disbanded in November 1948, and No. 77 Squadron came under the aegis
of a new organisation called RAAF Component.[49] The squadron was now the
largest operational unit in the RAAF, with a strength of 299 officers and men,
forty Mustangs, three CAC Wirraways, two Douglas C-47 Dakotas and two
Austers.[50] The Dakotas and Austers formed the No. 77 Squadron Communications
Flight.[51][52] In December 1949, the Mustangs competed in a gunnery
competition against three groups of Mustangs and two groups of F-80 Shooting
Star jets belonging to the US Far East Air Force (FEAF). No. 77 Squadron's
Flight Lieutenant "Bay" Adams achieved the highest individual score of the
competition, earning the personal congratulations of Lieutenant Generals
George E. Stratemeyer, commander of FEAF, and Horace Robertson, commander of
BCOF.[53] The RAAF personnel were preparing to return to Australia when, on 25
June 1950, they were placed on standby for action in the Korean War, which had
just broken out.[54]

Led by Wing Commander Lou Spence, No. 77 Squadron was committed to action over
Korea as part of United Nations Command (UN), and came under the operational
control of the US Fifth Air Force.[55] The Australian unit was specifically
requested by General Douglas MacArthur, commander of UN forces; the Mustang
was considered the best long-range ground-attack aircraft in the theatre, and
Stratemeyer contended that No. 77 Squadron was the best Mustang outfit in
Japan.[56] The squadron flew its initial escort and patrol sorties from
Iwakuni on 2 July 1950, becoming the first non-American UN unit to commence
operations.[16][57] Several Australian families were still living at Iwakuni
pending their repatriation from what had become an operational theatre, and
could watch the Mustangs depart for missions over Korea.[58]

A friendly fire incident occurred on 3 July 1950, when No. 77 Squadron
attacked a train full of US and South Korean troops on the main highway
between Suwon and Pyongtaek, inflicting many casualties, twenty-nine of them
fatal.[59][60] Spence had raised concerns before the mission that the North
Koreans could not have penetrated so far south, but was assured by Fifth Air
Force controllers that the target was correct; the incident was widely
reported in US newspapers but a public statement by Stratemeyer cleared the
RAAF of any blame.[61][62] No. 77 Squadron did not encounter enemy aircraft in
the opening phase of the war but often faced intense ground fire. It suffered
its first fatality on 7 July when its deputy commander, Squadron Leader Graham
Strout, was killed during a raid on Samchok.[63] He was also the first
Australian, and the first non-American UN serviceman, to die in Korea.[64][65]

For the next two months, equipped with bombs, rockets and napalm, No. 77
Squadron supported UN troops retreating before the North Korean advance. To
expedite turnaround times between missions, the Mustangs, which were still
based at Iwakuni, often refuelled and rearmed at Taegu near the Pusan
Perimeter, where UN forces made a last-ditch stand on the southern tip of
Korea.[61][66] One of the squadron's Dakotas regularly flew between Iwakuni
and Taegu carrying ordnance and spare parts.[66] According to the official
history of the Air Force in 1946–71, the squadron's part in the victory at
Pusan earned recognition "not only for the RAAF but also Australia at the
highest political levels in the United States".[61] During a visit to Japan in
August 1950, Prime Minister Robert Menzies presented the Gloucester Cup to No.
77 Squadron as the RAAF's most proficient unit of the past year.[66][67] That
month, the squadron claimed thirty-five tanks, 212 other vehicles, eighteen
railway engines or cars, and thirteen fuel or ammunition dumps
destroyed.[14][68]

On 3 September 1950, Sergeant Bill Harrop was forced down behind enemy lines
and executed by the North Koreans.[69][70] Six days later, Spence was killed
when his Mustang failed to pull out of a dive during a napalm attack on
Angang-ni.[63][71] His death was a serious blow to the squadron, and the RAAF
despatched Cresswell on his third tour as commanding officer to replace him.
Cresswell arrived at Iwakuni on 17 September and set about restoring morale,
undertaking four sorties on his first day of operations three days
later.[63][72] MacArthur had meanwhile launched an amphibious landing behind
North Korean lines at Inchon on 15 September, forcing the communists to
retreat from the Pusan Perimeter. No. 77 Squadron was transferred from Iwakuni
to Pohang, South Korea, on 12 October, to support UN forces advancing
northwards.[73] On 20 October, the squadron became a component of the RAAF's
newly established No. 91 (Composite) Wing, which also included No. 391 (Base)
Squadron, No. 491 (Maintenance) Squadron, and No. 30 Communications Flight,
formerly the No. 77 Squadron Communications Flight.[51][74] The wing and all
units except No. 77 Squadron, which came under the operational control of the
US 35th Fighter-Interceptor Group, were headquartered at Iwakuni.[74]

China entered the war in mid-October 1950, attacking advancing UN troops as
they closed in on the Yalu River. No. 77 Squadron undertook its first sorties
against Chinese ground forces on 1 November.[75][76] The squadron flew its
first missions supporting the Australian Army on 5 November, when it attacked
Chinese troops opposing the 3rd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment, at
Pakchon.[76][77] No. 77 Squadron personnel were housed in tents in freezing
conditions at Pohung; two pilots died from burns after a fire in their
quarters on 14 November.[78] Two days later the Australians began moving
forward with the 35th Group to Yonpo Airfield, near Hamhung.[76][79] North
Korea's counter-attack, supported by Chinese forces, led to the squadron being
withdrawn to Pusan on 3 December 1950.[80] The communists operated a Russian-
designed swept-wing jet fighter, the Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15, that was far
superior to all other fighters in the theatre except the new North American
F-86 Sabre.[81] Although the MiGs carried Chinese or North Korean markings,
they were frequently operated by seasoned Russian air force pilots, whose
deployment was unofficial, as the Soviet Union was not a combatant in the
Korean War.[82][83]

The RAAF attempted to procure Sabres to replace No. 77 Squadron's Mustangs,
but the priority being given to re-equipping the USAF meant that deliveries
would not be possible until 1954. The Australian government agreed to purchase
Gloster Meteor straight-wing jet fighters from Britain as the only viable
alternative; the initial order included thirty-six single-seat Mk.8
interceptors and four two-seat Mk.7 trainers.[81] No. 77 Squadron completed
its last Mustang mission on 6 April 1951 and returned to Iwakuni the next day
to begin converting to Meteors. It subsequently transferred to Kimpo, South
Korea, and commenced operations with its new aircraft on 29 July.[84][85] The
squadron deployed twenty-two Meteors at Kimpo, and came under the control of
the USAF's 4th Fighter-Interceptor Wing. Although it had operated effectively
as a ground-attack unit with its Mustangs, No. 77 Squadron's primary role in
the RAAF was interception, and it was expected that with the Meteor it could
again focus on fighter duties, particularly as by this stage the USAF had only
two squadrons of Sabres in the theatre.[86]

Wing Commander Gordon Steege succeeded Cresswell on 16 August 1951, by which
time No. 77 Squadron's Meteors had conducted offensive sweeps up the Yalu
River with USAF Sabres, and escorted Boeing B-29 Superfortresses on bombing
missions.[87][88] MiG-15s had appeared on several occasions without engaging
the Meteors; it was speculated at the time, and subsequently confirmed, that
they had been observing the performance of the newly arrived RAAF
jets.[88][89] No. 77 Squadron's first Meteor fatalities occurred on 22 August,
when two aircraft collided in mid-air as they returned to Kimpo after a
sweep.[88][90] The Meteors first engaged MiG-15s on 25 August, but scored no
hits. Four days later, eight Meteors and sixteen Sabres fought twelve MiGs;
one RAAF pilot ejected when his aircraft was shot down, and a second Meteor
was badly damaged. One week later another Meteor suffered severe damage in a
dogfight with MiGs.[87][91] As a result of these clashes, Steege became
convinced that the Meteor was outclassed as a fighter. Following discussions
with the Fifth Air Force, he decided to take No. 77 Squadron out of its air-
to-air combat role and curtail its operations in "MiG Alley", the area between
the Yalu and Chongchon Rivers on North Korea's border with Manchuria. This
caused controversy among those who believed that proper tactics exploiting the
Meteor's manoeuvrability and heavy armament would have allowed it to remain
competitive as a fighter; for the Australian pilots the change of role
amounted to a loss of prestige.[92][93] The Chief of the Air Staff, Air
Marshal George Jones, backed the decision, which relegated the squadron mainly
to escort duty and local air defence. Morale suffered and it was not until
Wing Commander Ron Susans succeeded Steege on 26 December 1951 that the
Meteors were once more assigned an offensive role, namely ground
attack.[92][94]

In the intervening period, Flight Lieutenant "Smoky" Dawson registered No. 77
Squadron's first jet combat claim when he damaged a MiG during an escort
mission near Anju, North Korea, on 26 September 1951.[90][96] On 27 October,
Flying Officer Les Reading was credited with damaging another MiG while
covering B-29s over Sinanju; it was subsequently confirmed as having been
destroyed, making it the squadron's first MiG "kill".[97][98] The squadron was
awarded the Republic of Korea Presidential Unit Citation for "exceptionally
meritorious service & heroism" on 1 November.[99][100] On 1 December 1951,
over Sunchon, at least twenty Soviet-piloted MiGs from the 176th Guards
Fighter Air Regiment ( _176 GvIAP_ ) attacked a formation of fourteen Meteors.
Both sides apparently overestimated the scale of the battle and the damage
inflicted to their opponents: three Meteors—one flown by Pilot Officer Vance
Drummond—were lost, but Soviet pilots claimed nine destroyed; Australian
pilots claimed one MiG shot down and another damaged, from a formation of at
least forty, though Russian sources suggest that all the MiGs returned to base
and less than twenty-five were available to _176 GvIAP_ at the time.[101][102]

On 8 January 1952, Susans led the squadron on its first ground-attack mission
in Meteors, which were armed with eight rockets under the wings as well as
their four internal 20 mm cannon, at Chongdan.[103][104] They continued to
operate mainly in the ground-attack role until the end of the war, but
registered two more victories over MiGs near Pyongyang on 4 and 8 May
1952.[105][106] The squadron took part in a mass air strike on 29 August, when
420 UN aircraft attacked Pyongyang.[107][108] One Meteor was shot down and
another damaged by MiGs following a ground-attack mission on 2 October
1952.[109][110] The squadron played a leading role in the destruction of a
large North Korean convoy on 16 March 1953: two Meteors discovered a line of
some 140 vehicles in a mountain pass south of Wonsan, halted it by destroying
trucks at the front and rear of the convoy, and then called in further support
from Kimpo and the USAF. The Australian aircraft eventually claimed twenty-
four trucks out of a total of ninety vehicles destroyed or damaged by UN
forces.[111][112] No. 77 Squadron was credited with downing its last MiG
southeast of Pyongyang on 27 March.[113] Squadron Leader Len McGlinchey became
its final wartime fatality when his Meteor crashed while taking off from Kimpo
on 16 July.[114]

Following the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement on 27 July 1953, the
squadron remained in South Korea on garrison duties—initially at Kimpo, later
at Kunsan—until transferring to Iwakuni on 12 October 1954.[16][115] It
departed for Australia on 19 November and arrived in Sydney on 3 December,
having been based overseas for eleven years, a record for an RAAF unit.[116]
Its performance in the early days of the war has been cited as a factor in the
United States' decision to ratify the ANZUS treaty in September 1951.[117] The
squadron's casualty rate in Korea was twenty-five percent killed or
captured.[118][119] Forty-one pilots died, thirty-five from the RAAF and six
on exchange from the Royal Air Force.[118][120] A further seven pilots became
prisoners of war.[109][121] Aircraft losses totalled almost sixty, including
over forty Meteors, mostly to ground fire.[118][122] The squadron flew 18,872
sorties, including 3,872 in Mustangs and 15,000 in Meteors.[109][123] It was
credited with shooting down five MiG-15s and destroying 3,700 buildings, 1,408
vehicles, ninety-eight railway engines and carriages, and sixteen
bridges.[118][124]

No. 77 Squadron became operational at RAAF Base Williamtown, New South Wales,
on 4 January 1955.[125] On 21 March, it joined Nos. 3 and 75 Squadrons as part
of No. 78 Wing, which had recently been reorganised following garrison duty in
Malta.[126] No. 77 Squadron ceased Meteor operations in August 1956 and re-
formed on 19 November equipped with CAC Sabres.[7] Between October 1958 and
February 1959, Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons deployed with No. 78 Wing to RAAF
Butterworth in Malaya, to support Commonwealth forces in the Emergency. The
Sabres were among the first to wear the RAAF's recently introduced "leaping
kangaroo" roundel.[127] No. 478 (Maintenance) Squadron provided servicing for
the aircraft.[128] No. 77 Squadron undertook its first mission dive-bombing
communist guerrillas on 13 August 1959, and flew two more ground-attack
sorties on 10 June 1960.[7][129] The RAAF pilots also sometimes tried to
startle the communists by diving their jets through the sound barrier to
create sonic booms that simulated the sound of artillery fire.[130] Two No. 77
Squadron Sabres collided in mid-air on 22 July, but both pilots ejected
safely.[7] The Emergency was declared officially over on 31 July 1960.[127]

The RAAF squadrons remained at Butterworth as part of Australia's contribution
to the Commonwealth Strategic Reserve. Eight Sabres, along with their pilots
and ground crew, were detached from No. 77 Squadron in May 1962 to re-form No.
79 Squadron at Ubon, Thailand.[131][132] The Sabres were flown to Thailand via
Singapore to give the appearance that they were not drawn from the Strategic
Reserve, thus preserving Malaysia's neutrality.[131] Personnel and equipment
from Nos. 3 and 77 Squadrons continued to rotate through No. 79 Squadron on a
regular basis.[133] The Butterworth-based Sabres, armed with Sidewinder
missiles, were responsible for regional air defence during the _Konfrontasi_
between Indonesia and Malaysia from July 1963 until August 1966, though no
combat took place.[134] From 26 October until 27 November 1965, a detachment
of six Sabres from No. 77 Squadron was based at Labuan to conduct combat
patrols over the Indonesian–Malaysian border on Borneo.[135] Following the
disbandment of No. 78 Wing in November 1967, No. 77 Squadron became an
independently operating unit under the command of Headquarters RAAF
Butterworth.[128]

No. 77 Squadron returned to Williamtown in early 1969 to re-equip with
Dassault Mirage III supersonic fighters, undertaking its initial flights on 7
July.[7][136] The Mirages were charged with interception, high- and low-angle
bombing, close air support, and photo reconnaissance; their armament included
30 mm cannon, Sidewinder missiles and conventional bombs.[137] No. 77
Squadron's prime role was ground attack, although none of the RAAF's Mirages
ever saw combat.[138][139] No. 481 Squadron was responsible for day-to-day
servicing, as well as most heavy maintenance.[140] No. 77 Squadron suffered
its first fatal Mirage accident on 3 April 1973, when an aircraft crashed
during a training flight at low altitude. Another pilot was killed when his
Mirage hit the water during formation flying at night on 24 June 1976.[141]
The squadron began training with laser-guided bombs in October 1980.[142] As
of March 1984, its aircraft complement was nineteen Mirages.[143] Two pilots
died following a mid-air collision at low level on 9 April that year.[144]

On 1 January 1985, in preparation for the introduction of the McDonnell
Douglas F/A-18 Hornet to Australian service, No. 77 Squadron took over all
Mirages and Macchi MB-326s of No. 2 Operational Conversion Unit, assuming
responsibility for fighter combat instructor, introductory fighter, and Mirage
conversion courses.[145][146] The transfer swelled the squadron's strength to
fifty-six aircraft—forty Mirages and sixteen Macchis—and over 500 officers and
men, making it the largest operational unit in the RAAF.[147][148] Along with
a heavily expanded training program, and its existing Australian Army close
support role, No. 77 Squadron's fleet support commitment was increased to take
up the slack resulting from the diminution of the Royal Australian Navy's
fixed-wing capability.[149] Its last fatal accident with the Mirage occurred
on 2 May 1986; the aircraft crashed into water during air-to-air gunnery
practice.[150]

The squadron began phasing out the Mirage in July 1986, and took delivery of
its first Hornet on 29 June 1987.[7][151] It had come under the control of a
newly re-formed No. 81 Wing that February.[152] No. 77 Squadron's last Mirage
departed Williamtown on 27 November 1987.[153] Hornet maintenance at
Williamtown was the responsibility of No. 481 Wing, which had evolved from No.
481 Squadron.[154][155] One of No. 77 Squadron's Hornets crashed near
Rockhampton, Queensland, on 19 May 1992, killing the pilot and his passenger,
a defence scientist.[156] In September that year, the squadron undertook a
proving exercise over Halifax Bay in Far North Queensland, when four of its
Hornets—refuelled in flight on the round trip from Williamtown by a Boeing 707
tanker—became the first jet aircraft in Australia to drop aerial mines.[157]
No. 481 Wing was reorganised as No. 402 Wing in July 1996; the latter
transferred its functions to No. 81 Wing's flying squadrons in July 1998.[158]

No. 77 Squadron operated a detachment of Pilatus PC-9 aircraft in the forward
air control role from 2000 until 2003; this role was subsequently filled by
the Forward Air Control Development Unit.[6] Four Hornets from No. 77 Squadron
were deployed to protect the US base at Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean
between November 2001 and February 2002, during the early phase of the war in
Afghanistan.[159] In March 2006, the squadron sent a detachment of aircraft to
RAAF Base East Sale, Victoria, to assist with security for the Commonwealth
Games being held in Melbourne.[160] No. 77 Squadron deployed to the Middle
East in September 2015 as part of Operation Okra, Australia's contribution of
the military intervention against ISIL; it handed over to the next rotation,
from No. 3 Squadron RAAF, in April 2016.[161][162]

The Australian government plans to replace the Hornet force with seventy-two
Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II fighters. Under the Defence Materiel
Organisation's Project AIR 6000 Phase 2A/B, the first Lightnings will be
delivered to the RAAF in late 2018. Each of No. 81 Wing's three fighter
squadrons will operate sixteen of the new aircraft. No. 77 Squadron is
scheduled to begin conversion in 2021; RAAF Hornet operations are expected to
cease the following year.[163] In December 2017, No. 77 Squadron received all
of No. 3 Squadron's Hornets and most of its personnel when that unit was re-
formed as an F-35 unit. The aircraft and personnel were assigned to a newly
established "C" Flight within No. 77 Squadron.[164]

