**Norfolk State University** ( **NSU** ) is a public historically black
university in Norfolk, Virginia. The university is a member-school of Thurgood
Marshall College Fund and the Virginia High-Tech Partnership.

The institution was founded on September 18, 1935 as the **Norfolk Unit
ofVirginia State University**.[4] Eighty-five students attended the first
classes held in 1935. Mr. Samuel Fischer Scott, an alumnus of Virginia Union
and Portsmouth native, served as the first director with the primary focus of
maintaining the solvency of the school. Dr. Lyman Beecher Brooks, a Virginia
Union alumnus, succeeded Mr. Scott as director in 1938, and served as provost,
1963–1969, and the first president 1969–1975.

In 1942, the school became independent of VSU and was named **Norfolk
Polytechnic College**.[4] Within two years, by an act of the Virginia
Legislature, it became a part of Virginia State College (now Virginia State
University).[4] By 1950, the 15th anniversary of the college founding, the
faculty had grown to fifty and the student enrollment to 1,018. In 1952, the
college's athletic teams adopted the "Spartan" name and identity.

The City of Norfolk provided a permanent site for the college on Corprew
Avenue, and in 1955 Brown Hall, formerly Tidewater Hall, opened as the first
permanent building on the new campus. In 1956 the future Norfolk State College
granted its first bachelor's degrees.

In 1969, the college divided from Virginia State College and was named
**Norfolk State College**. The college was issued accreditation from the
Southern Association of Colleges and Schools the same year with an enrollment
of 5,400 students. In 1975 and the year following, the first master's degrees
were awarded in Communications and Social Work, respectively. Dr. Harrison
Benjamin Wilson, Jr., in 1975, succeeded Dr. Lyman Beecher Brooks as President
after 37 years.

When the college was granted university status in 1979 by the General Assembly
of Virginia, it changed its name to Norfolk State University.

Norfolk State University celebrated its 50th anniversary in 1985 with a year
of observances and with an enrollment of 7,200. In 1995 Norfolk State
University's enrollment reached 9,112.

Upon the retirement of Dr. Harrison Benjamin Wilson in 1997, Dr. Marie
Valentine McDemmond, became NSU's third President in 1997 and served until her
retirement. Dr. Alvin J. Schexnider became interim president in July 2005. Dr.
Carolyn Winstead Meyers was selected as the fourth President and began service
on July 1, 2006. Dr. Tony Atwater was announced as the new president in 2011
becoming the fifth president and served until he was removed by the board of
visitors of Norfolk State University on August 23, 2013. Dr. Sandra DeLoatch
the Provost and President of Academic Affairs was named acting president
effective.[5] On September 13, 2013, Eddie N. Moore Jr. was appointed interim
president of Norfolk State University and started serving in that capacity on
September 23, 2013.[6]

In December 2013, the university was placed on probation by its regional
accreditor, the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, for "financial
and governance issues."[7] The probation was lifted two years later.[8]

Eddie Moore, Jr. became the 6th president of Norfolk State University on
January 10, 2016.[9]

Upon President Moore announcing his retirement in late September 2017 the NSU
board of visitors named Dr. Melvin Stith as interim president. He assumed
office on January 1, 2018. On June 24, 2019 Dr. Javaune Adams-Gaston will
become the 7th president of Norfolk State University after moving from her job
as Senior Vice President for Student Life at The Ohio State University.[10]

The Commission on Colleges of the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools
has accredited Norfolk State to award associate, baccalaureate, master and
doctoral degrees.[11] Currently, Norfolk State offers two doctorate and 15
master's degrees, including master's degree programs in Electronic
Engineering, Computer Science, and Criminal Justice. The school also offers 36
undergraduate degrees, including the only undergraduate degree in Optical
Engineering in Virginia.[12]

Norfolk State's undergraduate and graduate programs are divided into eight
schools/colleges.[13]

Located on the former site of the 50-acre (202,343 m2) Memorial Park Golf
Course, which the city of Norfolk sold to the school for one dollar, the
campus now encompasses 134 acres (0.5 km2) of land and 31 buildings.

The Joseph G. Echols Memorial Hall is a large health, physical education, and
ROTC complex with a seating capacity of 7,500. Other facilities include a
30,000-seat football stadium; a television studio and radio station, an
African art museum, and a multi-purpose performing arts center. Research
facilities include a life sciences building with a planetarium and a materials
research wing with crystal growth, organic synthesis, laser spectroscopy, and
magnetic resonance equipment.

In September 2009, the New Student Center facility opened. The three story
building, which includes a game room, a dining area, a new bookstore, a
wellness center (work-out facility), student lounges, and administrative
offices, marks the first of two major projects for NSU.

Construction on a New Nursing and General Classroom Building is underway and
scheduled to open in 2014, . Other recent construction on the campus includes
the new police station (2007), the Marie V. McDemmond Center for Applied
Research (2006), and the Spartan Suites Apartments (2005), and state-of-the-
art Library (2012).

The below list includes organizations registered with the Norfolk State
University Office of Student Actitvities for the 2007–2008 academic year.[14]

The university offers organized and informal co-curricular activities
including 63 student organizations, leadership workshops, intramural
activities, student publications and student internships.

Norfolk State sports teams participate in NCAA Division I (Football
Championship Subdivision for all sports including football) in the Mid-Eastern
Athletic Conference (MEAC). Norfolk State was formerly a member of the Eastern
Intercollegiate Conference (1953–1960) and the Central Intercollegiate
Athletic Association (1962–1996).[15]

The 2011–12 Norfolk State Spartans men's basketball team won the 2012 MEAC
Men's Basketball Tournament championship which gave them the conference's
automatic bid in the 2012 NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Tournament, the
school's first ever appearance in the tournament. The Spartans, a 15 seed,
defeated the #2 seeded Missouri Tigers in the second round, 86-84. This
victory was only the fifth time in NCAA Tournament history that a 15 seed
defeated a 2 seed, with the last coming in 2001 by MEAC in-state rival
Hampton.[16][17]

The Marching Spartan Legion Band performs at campus events and during Norfolk
State football games. They were featured performers in the Honda Battle of the
Bands in 2007 and 2008. In 2018 they were featured in the official music video
for the song Heavy Metal by French house act  Justice[18].

All nine of the National Pan-Hellenic Council organizations currently have
chapters at Norfolk State University. These organizations are:

The Council of Independent Organizations includes:

_The Spartan Echo_ is the official student-produced newspaper of Norfolk State
University. The paper is available in print (available twice a month) and on
the web (updated daily).[19]

Norfolk State operates WNSB(FM) radio, which broadcasts in stereo 24 hours a
day from the campus and covers all of the Hampton Roads, Virginia area,
reaching the Eastern Shore of Virginia, northeast North Carolina and the
Richmond, Virginia suburbs.[20] Established on February 22, 1980 (1980-02-22)
and known as " _Hot 91.1_ ", WNSB's programming is also broadcast via the
internet.[20][21]

This list of notable faculty and staff contains current and former faculty,
staff and presidents of the Norfolk State University.

This is a partial list of notable alumni which includes graduates, non-
graduate former students, and current students of Norfolk State University or
predecessors such as Norfolk State College.

