**North-Eastern Area Command** was one of several geographically based
commands raised by the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) during World War II.
For most of its existence it controlled units based in central and northern
Queensland as well as Papua New Guinea. It was formed in January 1942 from the
eastern part of the former Northern Area Command, which had covered all of
northern Australia and Papua. Headquartered at Townsville, Queensland, North-
Eastern Area Command's responsibilities included air defence, aerial
reconnaissance and protection of the sea lanes within its territory. Its
flying units, equipped with fighters, reconnaissance bombers, dive bombers and
transports, took part in the battles of Rabaul, Port Moresby and Milne Bay in
1942, and the landings at Hollandia and Aitape in 1944.

The area command continued to operate after the war, but its assets and
staffing were much reduced. Its responsibilities were subsumed in February
1954 by the RAAF's new functional commands: Home (operational), Training, and
Maintenance Commands. The area headquarters was disbanded in December 1956 and
re-formed as Headquarters RAAF Townsville.

The Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) formed North-Eastern Area Command at
Townsville, Queensland, on 15 January 1942, to take over the eastern portion
of what was previously Northern Area Command.[1] Northern Area had been
established on 8 May 1941 as one of the RAAF's geographically based command-
and-control zones, covering units in northern New South Wales, Queensland, the
Northern Territory, and Papua.[2] The roles of the area commands were air
defence, protection of adjacent sea lanes, and aerial reconnaissance. Each was
led by an Air Officer Commanding (AOC) responsible for the administration and
operations of air bases and units within his boundary.[2][3]

Northern Area was split into North-Western Area (NWA) and North-Eastern Area
(NEA) following the outbreak of the Pacific War in December 1941, to counter
distinct threats to Northern Australia and New Guinea, respectively.[1][4] Air
Commodore Frank Lukis, formerly in charge of Northern Area, was NEA's
inaugural AOC, taking responsibility for RAAF operations against the Japanese
in New Guinea, New Britain and surrounding islands.[5][6] His headquarters
staff numbered 248.[7]

On 20 January 1942, over 100 Japanese aircraft attacked Rabaul, destroying or
badly damaging six CAC Wirraways and killing or wounding eleven crewmen of No.
24 Squadron under Wing Commander John Lerew.[8][9] The next day, NEA
headquarters sent a signal to Lerew ordering him to keep his airfield open;
Lerew, with only two Wirraways left, replied using a variant of the legendary
ancient gladiatorial phrase to honour an emperor, " _Morituri vos salutamus_ "
("We who are about to die salute you"). Ignoring a further message from
headquarters to abandon his squadron and escape in a Lockheed Hudson bomber,
Lerew began evacuating staff to Port Moresby, New Guinea, on 22
January.[9][10]

No. 33 Squadron, operating ex-Qantas Short Empire flying boats and several
smaller transports, was raised in NEA on 19 February 1942.[11][12] Earlier
that month, Lukis warned higher command of the poor state of preparedness and
low morale of Australian Army troops at Port Moresby, due to lack of air cover
and apparent lack of interest from government echelons.[13] On 25 February,
Nos. 3 and 4 Fighter Sector Headquarters were established at Townsville and
Port Moresby, respectively, to coordinate fighter operations.[14] Horn Island,
in the Torres Strait, was raided by the Japanese on 14 March.[15] Three days
later, seventeen P-40 Kittyhawks of No. 75 Squadron, recently formed at
Townsville, deployed to Port Moresby.[16] Commanded by Squadron Leader John
Jackson, the squadron suffered heavy losses in the ensuing battle. At one
point NEA headquarters gave Jackson permission to withdraw but he refused, and
the squadron was eventually credited with destroying thirty-five Japanese
aircraft in the air and on the ground, securing Port Moresby until relieved by
the 35th and 36th Squadrons of the United States Army Air Forces (USAAF),
operating P-39 Airacobras.[17][18]

Several USAAF bomber formations operated under NEA's control in early 1942,
including A-24 Banshees of the 8th Bombardment Squadron out of Port Moresby,
and B-17 Flying Fortresses of the 435th Bombardment Squadron (initially known
as the "Kangaroo Squadron") out of Townsville.[19] As of 20 April, operational
authority over all RAAF combat infrastructure, including area commands, was
invested in the newly established Allied Air Forces (AAF) Headquarters under
South West Pacific Area Command (SWPA).[20][21] One result of this was the
integration of USAAF and RAAF staff at area headquarters. According to the
official history of the RAAF, though "more a diplomatic gesture than a
practical method of war organisation", it gave personnel from the two services
the opportunity to quickly become acclimatised to each other and "in North-
Eastern Area, as an example, the atmosphere was happy and the staff extremely
cooperative".[22] Following the Battle of the Coral Sea in May, USAAF units no
longer operated under RAAF control in the NEA but were commanded directly by
senior American officers of the AAF; overall responsibility for operational
tasking in NEA transferred to the AAF at the end of July.[23]

NEA's operational headquarters, a reinforced concrete bunker known as Building
81, was completed in May 1942. Located on Green Street, Townsville, at the
base of Castle Hill, it was topped with a suburban house to mislead enemy
aircraft.[24] The same month, Eastern Area Command was formed, taking control
of units in New South Wales and southern Queensland from Southern Area and
NEA.[25][26] This left NEA in command of Nos. 24, 33 and 76 Squadrons, as well
as No. 3 Fighter Sector Headquarters, at Townsville; No. 100 Squadron at
Cairns; No. 32 Squadron at Horn Island; and Nos. 11, 20 and 75 Squadrons, as
well as No. 4 Fighter Sector Headquarters, at Port Moresby.[27] The Japanese
raided Townsville four times between 25 and 31 July; most bombs fell in the
sea or the hills causing only one casualty, an injured child.[28] NEA's
boundaries were fine-tuned on 19 August: a portion of Queensland within the
Barkly Tableland and the Haslingden and Heywood districts was assigned to the
control of North-Western Area.[29] Lukis handed over command of NEA to Group
Captain (later Air Commodore) Harry Cobby on 25 August.[30] By the end of the
month, the headquarters staff numbered 684.[31] No. 75 Squadron, replenished
after its defence of Port Moresby, and No. 76 Squadron, deployed north from
Townsville and also flying Kittyhawks, played what senior Australian Army
commanders described as the "decisive" role in the Battle of Milne Bay in New
Guinea during August and September 1942.[32] During the battle, Cobby
exercised overall command of the RAAF units from NEA headquarters, while their
efforts were coordinated on the ground by Group Captain Bill Garing, NEA's
senior air staff officer.[33]

On 1 September 1942, No. 9 (Operational) Group was formed at Port Moresby as a
mobile strike force to move forward with Allied advances in the Pacific, in
contrast to the static, defensive nature of the area commands.[34][35] It took
over all units in New Guinea previously operating under NEA Command. NEA
initially retained administrative control of No. 9 Group but, on 1 January
1943, the group was made independent of the area command and its
administration became the responsibility of RAAF Headquarters, Melbourne.[30]
September 1942 also saw the formation of RAAF Command, led by Air Vice Marshal
Bill Bostock, to oversee the majority of Australian flying units in the
SWPA.[36][37] Bostock exercised control of air operations through the area
commands, although RAAF Headquarters continued to hold administrative
authority over all Australian units.[38] He personally coordinated operations
when they involved more than one area command, for instance when the fighter
squadrons of both NWA and NEA were required to repulse a major attack.[39] No.
42 (Radar) Wing was formed at Townsville in February 1943, and the following
month took control of all radar stations in NEA.[40] As of April 1943, the
area command directly controlled four squadrons tasked primarily with anti-
submarine warfare: No. 7 Squadron, flying Bristol Beaufort reconnaissance-
bombers out of Ross River; No. 9 Squadron, a fleet co-operation unit flying
Supermarine Seagulls from Bowen; and Nos. 11 and 20 Squadrons, flying
reconnaissance and bombing missions with PBY Catalinas from Cairns.[41]

In early 1943, Japan was still believed to be capable of invading, or at least
bombing, the Torres Strait islands, and NEA had only No. 7 Squadron, now
operating from Horn Island, to counter the threat. It was reinforced in April
by No. 84 Squadron, flying CAC Boomerang fighters.[42] The same month, No. 72
Wing was formed at Townsville, before deploying to Merauke, New Guinea.
Controlling No. 84 Squadron, No. 86 Squadron (flying Kittyhawks), and No. 12
Squadron (Vultee Vengeance dive bombers), the wing was responsible for Torres
Strait's air defence, as well as offensive operations against infrastructure
and shipping in Dutch New Guinea. In October, No. 84 Squadron converted to
Kittyhawks and transferred to the newly formed No. 75 Wing, which was given
responsibility for units at Horn Island, Thursday Island, and Higgins Field on
Cape York Peninsula.[43][44] In February 1944, No. 75 Wing headquarters moved
from Horn Island to Higgins Field, where it was soon joined by other units
under its control, Nos. 7 and 23 Squadrons; the latter operated Vengeances
until being declared non-operational in June, before re-equipping with B-24
Liberators for duty in North-Western Area.[45][46] By May, NEA's order of
battle on the Australian mainland consisted of Nos. 7, 9, 13 (operating
Lockheed Venturas from Cooktown), 20 and 23 Squadrons.[44]

Cobby served as AOC NEA until November 1943, handing over to Air Commodore
John Summers, who held command for the remainder of the war.[5] By the end of
November, NEA headquarters staff numbered 499, including ninety-seven
officers.[47] NEA's Catalinas joined aircraft of No. 9 Group in support of the
US invasion of New Britain in December 1943 and January 1944.[48] The
Catalinas also conducted mine-laying operations around the Timor Sea in the
lead-up to the landings at Hollandia and Aitape in April 1944.[49] That month,
No. 9 Group, which had become a static garrison force similar to the area
commands on mainland Australia, was renamed Northern Command and given
responsibility for RAAF units in New Guinea.[50][51] In August, No. 75 Wing
was disbanded and its units became the direct responsibility of NEA
headquarters.[52] The same month, No. 76 Wing headquarters, formed at
Townsville in January and subsequently based at Cairns, was transferred to
Darwin, Northern Territory.[53][54] There it came under the control of NWA
headquarters and oversaw operations by three Catalina squadrons, including No.
20.[55][56] No. 42 Wing disbanded in October 1944, following a decision to
assign control of RAAF radar stations to mobile fighter control units or
similar formations.[57] By the end of February 1945, NEA headquarters staff
numbered 743, including 127 officers.[58] No. 72 Wing headquarters transferred
to Townsville in May that year, and disbanded a month later.[54]

On 2 September 1945, following the end of the Pacific War, South West Pacific
Area was dissolved and the RAAF again assumed full control of all its
operational elements.[59] By the end of the month, NEA headquarters staff
numbered 526, including ninety-eight officers.[60] The Air Force shrank
dramatically as personnel were demobilised and units disbanded; most of the
RAAF's bases and aircraft employed in operations after the war were situated
within Eastern Area's sphere of control in New South Wales and southern
Queensland.[61] NEA headquarters staff at the end of 1945 totalled 227,
including sixty-three officers.[62]

In September 1946, the Chief of the Air Staff, Air Vice Marshal George Jones,
proposed reducing the five extant mainland area commands (North-Western,
North-Eastern, Eastern, Southern, and Western Areas) to three: Northern Area,
covering Queensland and the Northern Territory; Eastern Area, covering New
South Wales; and Southern Area, covering Western Australia, South Australia,
Victoria and Tasmania. The Australian Government rejected the plan and the
wartime area command boundaries essentially remained in place.[63][64]
Northern Command (redesignated Northern Area in 1945) was dissolved in
February 1947.[53] By 1949, NEA headquarters was located in Sturt Street,
Townsville.[64] No. 10 Squadron was based at Townsville from March that year,
operating Avro Lincolns over the Pacific and Australia's northern approaches
in the maritime reconnaissance and search-and-rescue roles.[65][66] Group
Captain (later Air Commodore) Ian McLachlan was appointed AOC NEA in September
1951;[67][68] he served two years in the post before handing over to acting
Air Commodore Patrick Heffernan.[69]

Commencing in October 1953, the RAAF was reorganised from a geographically
based command-and-control system into one based on function. In February 1954,
the newly constituted functional organisations—Home, Training, and Maintenance
Commands—assumed control of all operations, training and maintenance from
North-Eastern Area Command.[3][70] NEA headquarters remained in existence but
only, according to the Melbourne _Argus_ , as one of Home Command's "remote
control points".[71] It was disbanded on 3 December 1956, and was succeeded by
Headquarters RAAF Townsville (Headquarters Tactical Transport Group from June
1988, and Headquarters Operational Support Group from February 1991).[72][73]

As of 2009, the former NEA operational headquarters in Building 81, Green
Street, housed Townsville's State Emergency Service group.[24]

As at 30 April 1942, NEA's order of battle comprised:[74]

