**North Finchley** is a suburb of London in the London Borough of Barnet,
situated 7 miles (11 km) north-west of Charing Cross.

North Finchley is centred on Tally Ho Corner, the junction of the roads to
East Finchley, Church End, Friern Barnet and Whetstone. Church End is often
known as Finchley Central, owing to the name of the tube station located
there.

It is primarily a residential and shopping area, with several supermarkets and
many restaurants. The _artsdepot_ , a local community arts centre including a
gallery, a studio and a theatre, was opened on 23 October 2004 in an attempt
to revitalise the area, and in order to fill a gap created by the demolition
of the Gaumont cinema and what had become an open-air market.

The area has mainly 19th-century housing, ranging from quaint Victorian
cottages to substantially larger Victorian double-fronted houses. There is
also a dominant Edwardian style toward Woodside Park and Nether Street, but
with some modern houses—probably built between the 1930s and 1960s—towards
Friern Barnet. There are some mansion-style properties on Friern Barnet Lane,
and a development of luxury flats at Tally Ho Corner, above the _artsdepot_ ,
with views over Mill Hill and Hertfordshire. There are few local authority
estates in the area; the largest one is in Woodside Park where ex-Spice Girl
Emma Bunton grew up.

The new North Finchley bus station opened in 2004; however, it closed several
months later owing to safety issues, after a pensioner walked into the shelter
through the wrong entrance, was hit by a bus, and died. The bus station was
reopened in March 2007 after safety improvements had been implemented.

The bus station is served by routes 13 and 460, and by through routes 221 and
125 to Edgware and Colindale, respectively. The 'Cricketers' pub used to stand
adjacent to the old bus station.

The area is served by West Finchley and Woodside Park tube stations, both on
the Barnet branch of the Northern line.

On 26 July 1994 a bomb exploded outside Balfour House, a prominent building on
North Finchley High Street and location of the offices of numerous Jewish
charities. Earlier on the same day, a bomb had exploded outside the Israeli
embassy.[1] Two Palestinians, Samar Alami and Jawad Botmeh, were subsequently
convicted of carrying out the Finchley bombing.[2]

An urban district of Finchley, part of the then county of Middlesex (since
abolished) was created in 1894. In 1932 the Municipal Borough of Finchley was
created, but in 1965 the municipal borough was abolished and its area became
part of the London Borough of Barnet.

Margaret Thatcher was elected as MP for Finchley in 1959; she served until her
retirement from the House of Commons in 1992.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-
Commons-logo.svg.png) Media related to North Finchley at Wikimedia Commons

