The **North Eastern Railway War Memorial** is a First World War memorial in
York in northern England. It was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens to commemorate
employees of the North Eastern Railway (NER) who left to fight in the First
World War and were killed while serving. The NER board voted in early 1920 to
allocate £20,000 for a memorial and commissioned Lutyens. The committee for
the York City War Memorial followed suit and also appointed Lutyens, but both
schemes became embroiled in controversy. Concerns were raised from within the
community about the effect of the NER memorial on the city walls and its
impact on the proposed scheme for the city's war memorial, given that the two
memorials were planned to be 100 yards (90 metres) apart and the city's budget
was a tenth of the NER's. The controversy was resolved after Lutyens modified
his plans for the NER memorial to move it away from the walls and the city
opted for a revised scheme on land just outside the walls; coincidentally the
land was owned by the NER, whose board donated it to the city.

The NER memorial was unveiled on 14 June 1924 by Field Marshal Lord Plumer. It
consists of a 54-foot (16-metre) high obelisk which rises from the rear
portion of a three-sided screen wall. The wall forms a recess in which stands
Lutyens' characteristic Stone of Remembrance. The wall itself is decorated
with several carved swags and wreaths, including a wreath surrounding the
NER's coat of arms at the base of the obelisk. The memorial is a grade II*
listed building, and is part of a "national collection" of Lutyens' war
memorials.

The North Eastern Railway (NER), one of the largest employers in the north of
England, released over 18,000 of its employees to serve in the armed forces
during the First World War, many of them joining the 17th (North Eastern
Railway) Battalion of the Northumberland Fusiliers. By the end of the war,
2,236 men from the company had died on military service overseas; others were
killed at home by bombardments of east coast ports, such as the raid on
Scarborough, Hartlepool and Whitby, and in the three Zeppelin raids on
York.[1][2]

After the war, thousands of memorials were built across Britain. Among the
most prominent designers of memorials was architect Sir Edwin Lutyens,
described by Historic England as "the leading English architect of his
generation". Lutyens designed the Cenotaph on Whitehall in London, which
became the focus for the national Remembrance Sunday commemorations, as well
as the Thiepval Memorial to the Missing—the largest British war memorial
anywhere in the world—and the Stone of Remembrance which appears in all large
Commonwealth War Graves Commission cemeteries and in several of Lutyens' war
memorials in Britain, including the North Eastern Railway's.[3][4]

The war memorial is one of several buildings and structures in the centre of
York related to the NER, including the company's headquarters and the city's
original railway station. The site—chosen as being immediately adjacent to the
company's head office—was originally a coal depot and carriage
sidings.[1][3][5]

At a meeting in February 1920 the NER's board voted to allocate £20,000 to the
memorial project rather than seek donations from the company's workforce, and
commissioned Lutyens to design it.[3] Lutyens' commission was confirmed in
October 1921, for a fee of £700 plus out-of-pocket expenses. The NER's deputy
general manager explained that Lutyens had been chosen because he was "the
fashionable architect and therefore could do no wrong".[6]

The project became embroiled in a controversy surrounding its size and
location, which grew to envelop the proposed York City War Memorial. Following
the railway company's lead, the City War Memorial Committee also appointed
Lutyens, and endorsed his plan for a Stone of Remembrance elevated on a large
plinth in the moat by Lendal Bridge, 100 yards (90 metres) from the proposed
site of the NER's memorial. The controversy revolved partly around the
relationship between the two memorials—Lutyens felt that the two designs would
complement one another, but the city had given Lutyens a budget of £2,000, a
tenth of that allocated to him by the NER, and some members of the local
community were concerned that the railway company's memorial would be much
larger and would overshadow the city's.[3][7] Another concern, raised by a
city councillor, was that visitors walking into the city centre from the
railway station would see the NER's memorial first. Lutyens responded that he
felt the two memorials would show a common purpose, and thus that their
proximity was not an issue.[3][7]

The issue was further complicated by the proximity of both proposed schemes to
York's ancient city walls; both schemes required the consent of the Ancient
Monuments Board (later English Heritage and now Historic England),
particularly as Lutyens' design for the NER involved the memorial abutting the
city walls and would have required excavation of part of the ramparts, to
which the Yorkshire Architectural and York Archaeological Society (YAYAS)
strenuously objected. The NER's in-house architect suggested moving the
memorial ten feet (three metres) to the east, away from the wall; Lutyens, in
India at the time, dismissed the idea in a cable.[3][8][9] In February 1922,
the secretary of the YAYAS, Dr William Evelyn, gave a lecture in which he was
severely critical of the NER's proposed memorial. He told his audience "I
think it is an enormous pity that they cannot find room in which to place a
sacred emblem commemorative of the patriotism, bravery, and self-sacrifice of
our own soldiers of the twentieth century and that it should be considered
necessary to deface and despoil another sacred emblem".[7] The City War
Memorial Committee and representatives of the NER met with Charles Reed Peers,
the Ancient Monuments Board's chief inspector, at the NER's offices on 8 July
1922, in preparation for which the NER erected a full-size wooden model of
their proposed memorial. Peers approved the city's scheme, noting that its
proposed location was in fact a newer structure and not part of the walls'
ramparts, but requested that Lutyens submit a revised design for the NER's
memorial to move it away from the wall. Lutyens acquiesced but observed that
the modifications would require a reduction in the size of the screen wall and
thus in the size of the names to be listed on it, which he felt was
detrimental to the scheme. He submitted the revised designs and they were
approved in October 1922.[10]

The remaining issues were largely resolved after the city relented to public
pressure and opted to site its memorial on a plot of land off Leeman Road,
just outside the city walls, and for a reduced scheme in the form of a cross
due to a shortage of funds. Coincidentally, the land was owned by the railway
company and the NER board donated it to the city in a mark of gratitude for
the good relations between the company and the city; the NER had by that time
been amalgamated into the London and North Eastern Railway (LNER) as a result
of the Railways Act 1921.[3][8]

Built from Portland stone, the memorial is sited against the ramparts of the
city walls. It consists of a single, 30-foot (9-metre) obelisk rising from a
three-tiered pedestal set into the rear portion of a three-sided screen wall.
The wall creates a recess, sheltering a Stone of Remembrance. The two flanking
sides terminate with urn-shaped finials; the ends of each wall are decorated
with a laurel wreath in relief carving; the inside of the walls is further
decorated with laurel swags below the urns. The rear wall bears further relief
swags to either side of the obelisk; the North Eastern Railway Company's coat
of arms is engraved on the pedestal of the obelisk, just above the level of
the screen wall, which is surrounded by another laurel wreath. The obelisk
rises above the screen wall to a total height of 54 feet (16
metres).[3][11][12][13] The Stone of Remembrance is a monolith in the shape of
an altar, 12 feet (3.7 metres) long and curved so slightly as to barely be
visible to the naked eye; it is deliberately devoid of any decoration besides
the inscription "THEIR NAME LIVETH FOR EVERMORE".[14][15]

The dedication is inscribed in the centre of the rear part of the screen wall:
"IN REMEMBRANCE OF THOSE MEN OF THE NORTH EASTERN RAILWAY WHO GAVE THEIR LIVES
FOR THEIR COUNTRY THE COMPANY PLACES THIS MONUMENT"; the dates of the First
World War are inscribed to either side. The 2,236 names were inscribed on
panels affixed to the wall. Behind the Stone of Remembrance are 15 slates set
into the floor of the memorial in 1984, bearing the names of the LNER's 551
dead from the Second World War.[3][16][17][18]

The North Eastern Railway War Memorial was finally constructed once the
ancient Monuments Board approved Lutyens' modified design; it was unveiled by
Field Marshal Herbert Plumer, 1st Baron Plumer (later 1st Viscount Plumer) at
a ceremony on 14 June 1924,[3] and dedicated by the Archbishop of York Cosmo
Gordon Lang.[19] A crowd of five to six thousand people gathered for the
ceremony, among them multiple civic officials and officers of the LNER and
former NER, including Sir Ralph Wedgwood, chief officer of the LNER; the
Sheriff of York; and the lord mayors of Bradford, Hull, and York. Sentries
from the Durham Light Infantry stood at the four corners of the Stone of
Remembrance.[20] Among those to give speeches was Edward Grey, 1st Viscount
Grey of Fallodon, a member of the NER's board and the former foreign secretary
famous for his remark "the lamps are going out". Grey spoke of the losses
caused by the war: "the old North Eastern board and its general manager
numbered some twenty persons. Out of those twenty, four lost sons in the war;
three lost only sons. There is no reason to suppose that proportion is
exceptional".[10] At the conclusion of the service, the "Last Post" was
sounded and the crowd observed two minutes' silence.[20] The city's war
memorial was unveiled a year later.[3]

The inscriptions, particularly the names of those killed, suffered from
exposure to the elements. Restoration work, including re-carving, was carried
out in the 1980s, funded by donations from the British Railways Engineers Ex-
Servicemen's Association match-funded by British Rail. Erosion continued in
the years following and in lieu of re-carving them and causing further damage
to the memorial, the names were recorded in a book which is held by the
National Railway Museum.[3][16]

The memorial was designated a grade II* listed building (a status which offers
statutory protection from demolition or modification, defined as "particularly
important buildings of more than special interest" and applied to about 5.5%
of listed buildings) on 10 September 1970.[3][21] In November 2015, as part of
commemorations for the centenary of the First World War, Lutyens' war
memorials were recognised as a "national collection" and all 44 of his free-
standing memorials in England were listed or had their listing status reviewed
and their National Heritage List for England entries updated and expanded. As
part of this process, the York City memorial was upgraded to grade II* to
match the NER's memorial.[22]

**Bibliography**

**Citations**

