**Noticias Telemundo** (Spanish pronunciation: [noˈtisjas teleˈmundo]; Spanish
for Telemundo News) is the news division of Telemundo, an American Spanish-
language free-to-air television network that is owned by NBCUniversal Hispanic
Enterprises and Content, a subsidiary of the NBCUniversal Television Group
division of NBCUniversal. The news division is based out of the network's
facilities in the Miami suburb of Hialeah, Florida.

The division produces a flagship nightly early-evening newscast, _Noticias
Telemundo_ , focusing on international news and stories of relevance to the
network's main target demographic of Hispanic and Latino Americans. Other
programs produced by the news division include morning news-talk show _Un
Nuevo Día_ , newsmagazine series _Al Rojo Vivo con Maria Celeste_ , and Sunday
morning political affairs program _Enfoque con Jose Diaz-Balart_.

Noticias Telemundo maintains bureaus located at many of the network's
television stations across the United States (particularly those owned by
parent subsidiary Telemundo Station Group, that are owned-and-operated
stations of the network) and throughout Latin America, and uses video content
from English language sister network NBC's news division NBC News.

The history of Noticias Telemundo traces back to 1987, when the network
debuted its first news program _Noticiero Telemundo-HBC_ , a program produced
through an outsourcing agreement with the Miami-based Hispanic-American
Broadcasting Corporation that was anchored by Lana Montalban;[4] following the
program's cancellation, Montalban accepted an anchor position at the network's
New York City owned-and-operated station WNJU, where she served as an anchor
of its evening newscasts until 1992.

The following year, on March 24, 1988, Telemundo entered into a partnership
with cable news channel CNN to produce two daily newscasts, titled _Noticiero
Telemundo CNN_ ("Telemundo CNN News"); CNN took over production of the
network's newscasts on May 31 of that year. In addition, CNN also produced an
hour-long weekend news review program, _Resumen Semanal Telemundo-CNN_ , and
news briefs that aired five times per day for Telemundo.[5][6] Produced at the
CNN Center in Atlanta, the program was anchored by Jorge Gestoso and Maria
Elvira Salazar. Salazar later left the program to become a reporter at rival
Univision's news division Noticiero Univision; Chilean native Cecilia Bolocco,
a former Miss Universe, was named as Salazar's replacement. The final
incarnation produced in Atlanta was co-anchored by Patricia Janiot. In 1992,
Enrique Gratas joined the network to serve as anchor of _Ocurrió Así_ , a
nightly newsmagazine providing in-depth stories dealing with issues pertinent
to U.S. Hispanics and investigative reports.

In 1994, Telemundo launched its own 24-hour cable news channel, Telenoticias,
which was operated as a joint venture between Argentinean television network
Artear, Spain broadcaster Antena 3 and Reuters.[7][8] The venture was not
successful and the partners later sold the channel to CBS Cable in 1996, which
rebranded the network as CBS Telenoticias and increased its distribution
across North, Central and South America. Following the sale of Telenoticias to
CBS, Telemundo entered into a content partnership with the channel to produce
early-evening and prime time newscasts that would air on the broadcast
network. CBS sold Telenoticias back to Telemundo in February 2000,[9] after
which the network was relaunched as the entertainment-based Telemundo
Internacional.

Noticias Telemundo was founded as an in-house network news division on August
25, 1999, under the auspices of former CBS News vice president Joe Peyronnin,
who served as the Telemundo division's executive vice president until
2006.[10] After Telemundo's agreement with CBS Telenoticias ended the day
prior, the network launched two half-hour evening newscasts on January 1,
2000, the nightly general news broadcast _Noticiero Telemundo_ , which was
produced out of Telemundo's Hialeah, Florida headquarters; and the weeknight-
only late news program _Noticiero Telemundo Internacional_ (the latter program
was pre-empted on many of Telemundo's news-producing O&O stations and select
affiliates, only airing on affiliates that did not operate their own news
department, in the event that a station pre-empted their regular local
newscasts during major national holidays or the network's national feed in
markets where there was no in-market affiliate), an internationally focused
news program produced out of its new bureau in Mexico City.

In September 2000, the network launched a two-hour morning news program, _Esta
Mañana_ , the network's first national morning show entry, hosted by Jose
Diaz-Balart (who joined the network from CBS, where he anchored _CBS This
Morning_ prior to its cancellation) and former Univision anchor Gloria
Calzada.[11] Additional news programs were created by the network in the wake
of the September 11, 2001 attacks: _Buenos Dias_ was replaced by _Hoy en el
Mundo_ ("Today in the World") on ABC, an ABC news program focused on national
and international stories anchored by Diaz-Balart and Marian de la Fuente; it
also launched a companion early morning newscast _Primera Hora_ ("First
Hour"). Also in wake of the September 11, 2001 attacks Telemundo launched
another news program that aired weeknights called "Un Nuevo Mundo, Una Nacion
Unida" that aired at 7 P.M. that program was anchored by Pedro Sevcec and
Ocurrió Así anchor Ana Patricia Candiani, the show replaced a weeknight novela
called "Provacame" that show was rescheduled [1]. In 2002, the network
launched a late afternoon news and entertainment magazine series, similar in
format to its Univision competitor _Primer Impacto_ , _Al Rojo Vivo con Maria
Celeste_.

In 2005, Telemundo signed longtime Univision anchor Maria Antonieta Collins to
a long-term contract, in which she would host a program for the network. The
network then cancelled _Hoy en el Mundo_ on ABC News and _En la Madrugada_ ,
replacing them in September 2006 with a news and lifestyle program titled
_Cada Dia with Maria Antonieta_ ("Every Day with Maria Antonieta"); Collins
hosted the program, with Diaz-Balart serving as co-host and also serving as
anchor of another early morning news program titled _Noticiero Telemundo:
Primera Hora_ ("Telemundo Newscast: First Hour"), before leaving that program
and being replaced as anchor by Ana Patricia Candiani.

In 2007, Telemundo discontinued the Saturday and Sunday editions of the
flagship _Noticiero Telemundo_ broadcast and _Al Rojo Vivo_ , which were
replaced with feature films and reality-based series (with the move, Univision
became the only Spanish-language broadcast network to carry a weekend edition
of its evening newscast and the only one carrying any non-sports news
programming on weekends altogether); weekend editions of _Noticiero Telemundo_
were restored in October 4, 2014, focusing on general news, health and
consumer segments, analysis of the previous week's major stories and a preview
of events occurring in the coming week (which was scheduled 90 minutes earlier
than the flagship weeknight editions, at 5:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific Time,
to accommodate the network's prime time entertainment programming).[12]

_Cada Dia_ was cancelled in May 2008, after Collins announced that she would
leave Telemundo when her contract expired in August of that year return to
news anchoring and as a result of low ratings for the program;[13] _Noticiero
Telemundo: Madrugada_ , meanwhile, was replaced by an hour-long music and
dance program that was spun off from the network's Saturday afternoon series
_Descontrol_. The former of the two morning news shows was replaced by a new
hybrid news and lifestyle program (similar in format to Univision's
_¡Despierta América!_ ), _¡Levántate!_ ("Get Up"), which was initially
broadcast and produced by out of the studios of the network's San Juan, Puerto
Rico station WKAQ-TV. The hybrid program, which was retitled _Un Nuevo Día_
("A New Day") in July 2012, originally included local participation of the
network's Miami owned-and-operated station WSCV from its studios in the suburb
of Miramar, Florida, and bureaus located in New York City, Los Angeles and
Mexico City. The show was later revamped in February 2011, discontinuing the
local cut-ins and relocating its production operations to Telemundo's
headquarters in Hialeah.[14][15][16]

In 2011, Telemundo debuted a half-hour Sunday morning political and cultural
affairs talk show _Enfoque_ , hosted by Diaz-Balart, marking a restoration of
weekend news programming on the network (outside of its weekend evening sports
highlight program _Titulares Telemundo_ ); the program was expanded to one
hour in January 2014.

On July 6, 2015, _Noticiero Telemundo_ became the first national network
newscast produce an entire broadcast using mobile devices. Journalists
reporting for the special "Digital Day" broadcast were equipped with
smartphones and tablet computers to record and transmit stories included on
the broadcast, which was also streamed on Noticiero Telemundo's Periscope
account, incorporating behind-the-scenes footage of the program's anchors and
reporters during breaks within the program.[17]

† _Indicates deceased_

