**Noticias Univision** (Spanish pronunciation: [noˈtisjas uniβiˈsjon], Spanish
for Univision News) is the news division of Univision, an American Spanish
language free-to-air television network that is owned by the Univision
Television Group division of Univision Communications. The news division is
based out of the network's facilities, referred to as the "NewsPort", in the
Miami suburb of Doral, Florida, which it shares with sister English language
news channel Fusion and Univision's flagship owned-and-operated station WLTV-
DT.

The division's flagship program is _Noticiero Univision_ , composed of two
nightly evening newscasts (airing in the early and late evening) focusing on
international news and stories of relevance to the network's main target
demographic of Hispanic Americans. Other programs produced by the news
division include morning news-talk show _¡Despierta América!_ , newsmagazine
series _Primer Impacto_ and _Aquí y Ahora_ , and Sunday morning political
affairs program _Al Punto con Jorge Ramos_.

Noticias Univision maintains bureaus located at many of the network's
television stations across the United States (particularly those owned by
parent subsidiary Univision Television Group, that serve as owned-and-operated
stations of the network) and throughout Latin America. Noticiero Univision
also has news share agreements with many of the national terrestrial networks
in those same nations and will often carry their footage and reporting with
credit. Noticias Univision uses content from Mexico-based broadcaster (and
Univision's major content partner) Televisa, Venezuela-based Venevision,
Colombia-based RCN TV, Peru-based América Televisión, and regional-wide CNN en
Español.

The national newscasts began on Univision in 1981 when the network was known
as the Spanish International Network, and before the network's name change in
1987 was known as _Noticiero Nacional SIN_. In 1987, Televisa owner Emilio
Azcárraga Milmo, who also oversaw SIN (then a subsidiary of the Mexico City-
based company), appointed former Televisa news anchor Jacobo Zabludovsky as
director of SIN's news division; the move met with protest among staff at the
news division, concerned over the extent of the autonomy of SIN's news
department and potential censorship in its journalistic practices
(specifically, the reporting on the Fidel Castro regime in Cuba, which while
recognized in Mexico, did not have aspects that led to the migration of Cubans
to the United States), with most news staffers opting to quit.[3]

After Azcárraga and Emilio Nicolas, Sr. subsequently sold their interests in
SIN parent Spanish International Communications to Hallmark Cards after the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and the U.S. Justice Department asked
them to sell the network to a U.S.-based company amid inquiries as to whether
Nicolas was being used by the Azcárraga family to skirt the FCC's rules
prohibiting foreign ownership of broadcast media, in 1987, the newly renamed
Univision appointed Roberto FE Soto – a former producer at NBC News – to
produce a revamped flagship evening newscast, _Noticiero Univision_ , the
latter becoming the network's youngest executive; the network also reassigned
Jorge Ramos – then the host of the network's first attempt at a morning
program, the two-hour-long _Mundo Latino_ – and hired veteran journalist Maria
Elena Salinas (the latter of whom replaced Teresa Rodriguez as anchor) to co-
anchor the evolving network newscast.[3]

Univision eventually decided to expand its news programming to afternoons; in
1992, the network debuted _Noticias y Más_ ("News and More"), anchored by
Jackie Nespral, Ambrosio Hernandez and Raúl Peimbert; Myrka Dellanos joined
the program after Nespral's departure later that year. Hernandez and Peimbert
left Univision in 1993 to join Telemundo, while Nespral became co-host of the
weekend edition of NBC's _Today_. Univision had other plans for the moribund
show: the network revamped its format, changed its name and its theme music,
and hired Puerto Rican-born María Celeste Arrarás as a weekend reporter to
serve as Dellanos' partner; the retooled newsmagazine series became _Primer
Impacto_ in February 1994.[4]

Then on April 14, 1997, Univision replaced reruns of Televisa-produced
children's programs (such as _Plaza Sesamo_ ) and re-entered into the morning
news arena for the first time in eight years with the premiere of _¡Despierta
América!_. Maintaining a format similar to its English language counterparts,
it was designed to compete with (and was loosely based on the format of)
_Today_ , ABC's _Good Morning America_ and _CBS This Morning_, with a focus on
the network's Hispanic and Latino target demographic. The program quickly grew
into a major competitor, increasing Univision's viewership in its morning time
period by more than 46% by April 1998, and developed a unique style in its
reporting of various types of news stories (including health, lifestyle,
fashion, beauty and entertainment news, the latter of which was featured as
part of a segment called "échate pa' acá" ("Come here") with a focus on
popular Latino actors and musicians).[5][6]

In 1998, Univision premiered a prime time investigative news magazine _Aquí y
Ahora_ , which focuses on in-depth investigative pieces and interviews with
newsmakers. From 2000 to 2010, Univision was the only major American broadcast
network to increase its news viewership, while its English-language
counterparts on ABC, NBC and CBS each lost half of their total viewership.[7]
By the early 2000s, as the network expanded its national reach through the
signing of new over-the-air affiliates, Univision's news programs had grown to
regularly outrank its Spanish language competitors, with the early-evening
edition of _Noticiero Univision_ often placing ahead of its English language
rivals ( _NBC Nightly News_ , _ABC World News Tonight_ and the _CBS Evening
News_ ) among viewers in the 18-49 demographic. On September 9, 2007, the
network premiered the first Sunday morning talk show on American Spanish
language television, _Al Punto_ , a program moderated by Jorge Ramos that
features discussions on political and socioeconomic issues pertinent to
American Hispanics.[8]

On December 9, 2010, Univision announced that it had hired Isaac Lee as the
president of its news division;[9] His duties were expanded upon on October 4,
2013, when he was named chief executive officer of its new cable news channel
Fusion, and further in February 2015, when he became president of Univision's
digital media operations through a reorganization of that division.[10][11]

In March 2011, the network hosted its first Presidential town hall meeting;
the televised special – which was watched by more than 2.7 million viewers,
and featured anchor Jorge Ramos and President Barack Obama – focused on the
future of education in the United States.[12] Noticias Univision would later
produce two town hall debates between presidential incumbent Obama and
Republican challenger Mitt Romney the following year in the run-up to the 2012
Presidential elections.

Also in 2011, Noticias Univision formed two new departments within the news
division: an investigative reporting unit, which was led by Pulitzer Prize
winner Gerardo Reyes, and a documentary unit, which produced several
critically acclaimed films on issues affecting the Latin American and
international communities.[7][13][14] The division's expanded commitment to
investigative journalism helped Noticias Univision earn multiple journalism
awards since 2012 including Peabody and Investigative Reporters and Editors
Awards for its investigative piece on Operation Fast and Furious, two Gracie
Awards, a Cronkite Award for Excellence in Political Journalism and fourteen
other award wins for five documentaries produced by both
units.[15][16][17][18][19] In addition, the Academy of Television Arts and
Sciences honored Jorge Ramos and Maria Elena Salinas with Lifetime Achievement
Awards at the 33rd News & Documentary Emmy Awards in 2012.[20]

In March 2013, Noticias Univision and Participant Media announced a
partnership to co-produce ten, one-hour documentaries to air on Pivot Channel
in English and on Univision in Spanish. Three months later, in June of that
year, the Documentary Unit produced _Violación de un Sueño_ ("Rape in the
Fields"), which was produced in partnership with the PBS documentary program
_Frontline_ and the Center for Investigative Reporting.[21]

The network's flagship newscast, _Noticiero Univision_ , is a traditional
evening news program that provides a general rundown of the day's news
headlines, with more of a bent towards stories occurring in Latin America and,
domestically, news stories and issues of utmost importance to Hispanic and
Latino Americans. Because of this, reports focusing on immigration and
diplomatic relations with Latin America are regularly highlighted on the
program, in addition to issues relating to government, healthcare and economic
issues. The main early-evening broadcast of the program is currently co-
anchored by Jorge Ramos and Maria Elena Salinas (who have shared those duties
since 1986, a departure from the traditional single-anchor format used by the
evening newscasts of its English language competitors ABC, NBC and CBS), and
Félix de Bedout and Arantxa Loizaga on weekend evenings. The program is on
equal footing with the English language newscasts ratings-wise in urban areas
with a large Hispanic population, often being the top network newscast in
areas such as New York City, Chicago, Los Angeles and Miami.

A secondary late-night edition of the program, _Noticiero Univision: Edición
Nocturna_ ("Univision News: Evening Edition"), airs nightly at 11:30 p.m.
Eastern and Pacific Time (with a rebroadcast at 4:30 a.m. local time). The
program – which is one of only two traditional national newscasts among the
major U.S. broadcast networks (alongside _Hechos_ on competitor Azteca) that
airs in a late-evening time slot – maintains a similar format to the early-
evening edition, with more of a focus on major news headlines; however, the
program utilizes separate anchors from the early broadcast for the weeknight
editions. From 1999 to 2008, the late-evening newscast was known as _Noticiero
Univision Ultima Hora_ , maintaining an in-depth, investigative focus anchored
by Enrique Gratas.

Noticias Univision also produces 60-second news capsules (titled _Breve
Informativo de Noticiero Univision_ , or "Univision News Brief") that air
during commercial breaks – except those featured during the _Noticiero
Univision_ -branded early and late newscasts – each hour throughout the
broadcast day on Univision, and provides special report cut-ins within regular
programming if needed during breaking news events. Some newsmagazine programs
produced by Televisa (such as _Hoy_ and _Tras la Verdad_ ) also air as part of
the network's schedule.

**Fusion** is a digital cable and satellite television channel operated by
Fusion Media Network, LLC, a joint venture between Univision Communications
and the Disney-ABC Television Group subsidiary of The Walt Disney Company,
which launched on October 28, 2013. Relying in part on the resources of the
news divisions operated by the respective companies, ABC News and Noticias
Univision, the network carries a broad mix of news, lifestyle, pop culture,
satire and entertainment programs aimed at English-speaking millennial adults
between the ages of 18 and 34 (marking Univision's first major push into
English-language programming), including those of Hispanic and Latino American
heritage.[22][23][24][25][26] Fusion operates out of Noticias Univision's
"Newsport" facility in Doral, Florida;[27] although, while Univision handles
programming responsibilities for Fusion and Disney-ABC Television Group
provides advertising sales and distribution for the channel, it operates
independently from ABC News and Noticias Univision, employing its own hosts
and correspondents, management, production staff and board of directors.[28]

In December 2010, Noticias Univision president Isaac Lee announced plans to
start an English language cable news channel aimed at American Hispanics;[29]
after Univision Communications reached an agreement with The Walt Disney
Company to partner in the development of the channel,[30] the two companies
formally announced its launch on May 8, 2012.[31] Through its focused target
demographic, which is regarded as being fluent in digital consumption and
favors social media and internet sources over traditional broadcast and print
media for receiving news content, the network operates FusionLive, an online
and mobile streaming service available to subscribers of participating cable
and satellite providers.[32]

**Univision Noticias** is a planned Spanish language cable news channel, which
Univision Communications announced on May 19, 2011, in a press release
mentioning the launch of three specialty cable channels.[33] Univision secured
a carriage deal with satellite provider Dish Network to carry Univision
Noticias and sister networks Univision Deportes Network and Univision
tlnovelas in January 2012; As of October 2015[update], however, the network
has not yet launched.[34][35]

Noticias Univision also maintains a separate website – powered through a
partnership with Tumblr – and a companion Twitter feed, under the banner
**Univision News**.[36][37] The website and feed provides national and
international news content presented in English, intended to cater to
Hispanics and other news consumers not fluent in the Spanish language.

On May 21, 2015, Univision Communications announced that it would acquire The
Root, a magazine-style news and culture website aimed at African-Americans,
from the Slate Group division of Graham Holdings Company (whose chairman and
CEO, Donald E. Graham, co-founded the site with Henry Louis Gates Jr. in
2008). The deal will allow The Root to use Univision Communications' digital
production facilities and publishing infrastructure, although it will maintain
editorial autonomy over its content and its existing editorial staff
(including managing editor Lyne Pitts and publisher and vice president of
digital content Donna Byrd, the latter of whom was also appointed as a member
of the Univision Digital division's management staff).[38][39][40]

1 _All Univisionowned-and-operated stations are considered bureaus of Noticias
Univision, including those not listed here._

After Donald Trump launched his candidacy for the Republican presidential
nomination in June 2015, Noticias Univision lead anchor Jorge Ramos pursued an
interview with Trump to discuss the comments he made in his declaratory
campaign speech disparaging Mexican immigrants, accusing Mexico of sending
criminals, rapists and drug importers to the United States (which led
Univision Communications to terminate its contract to air the Miss USA and
Miss Universe pageants, which were set to air on sister network UniMás through
a five-year deal signed that February, and prohibit its employees from
conducting company business at Trump-owned hotels or resorts; Trump
subsequently filed a $500 million breach of contract lawsuit against Univision
over the contract termination). On June 26, Trump posted a handwritten
correspondence letter sent by Ramos, requesting an interview with him, on
Instagram, which contained Ramos' personal cell phone number for business use
(which was unobscured), before deleting the post.[41][42][43][44][45]

At a press conference held by Trump on August 25, 2015 at the Grand River
Center in Dubuque, Iowa, Ramos – attempting to ask a question to Trump about
his immigration policies without being called on beforehand, as Trump had
pointed to another reporter in the audience – was rebuffed by Trump, who
repeatedly asked Ramos to sit down and remarked to him to "go back to
Univision." Security present at the conference escorted Ramos out of the
hotel's conference room, where one member of the security team (whom campaign
officials denied was a Trump staffer) told Mexican-born Ramos – who became an
American citizen in 2008 – to "get out of my country." An aide for Trump
invited Ramos to re-enter the conference about 15 minutes later on the
pretense that he wait to be called upon, engaging in a heated exchange with
Trump on his hardline stance on immigration when asked to field a question. In
a series of interviews regarding his removal from the press conference, Ramos
accused Trump of "spreading hate" and questioned the feasibility of Trump's
campaign proposals to conduct mass deportations of undocumented families and
repeal a statute in the U.S. Constitution granting birthright citizenship,
later citing a poll which indicated 75% of prospective Latino voters held
unfavorable opinions of him regarding Trump's viability as a presidential
candidate.[46][47][48] In a statement supporting Ramos, Univision chief
executive officer Randy Falco blasted his treatment by Trump, calling it
"beneath contempt" and suggesting that Trump comport himself better with
members of the press as his campaign continues, stating "Mr. Trump
demonstrated complete disregard for [Ramos] and for the countless Hispanics
whom Jorge seeks to represent through press questions that are at the heart of
the First Amendment."[49]

As he has gained visibility in the general journalistic community in recent
years, Ramos has received criticism of his balancing of journalistic ethics
and an advocacy approach in his reporting (such as his criticism of the lack
of Latino moderators for the U.S. presidential debates in which he stated that
those sanctioning the debates were "stuck in the 1950s", and his challenging
of presidential candidates Barack Obama and Mitt Romney's immigration policies
in a Univision-produced political forum in which Ramos served as a moderator),
with Luis Silberwasser, president of rival network Telemundo (whose executive
vice president of network news, Luis Carlos Velez, also made veiled criticisms
that Univision was not promoting "fair, balanced and objective journalism"),
citing a poll of Hispanic and Latino adults conducted in conjunction with
sister network NBC and _The Wall Street Journal_ that stated immigration, as
while being important, was "not [a] defining issue, as other media outlets
would lead you to believe" in the 2016 election season. Similarly as did
Trump, Ramos was criticized for his line of questioning at the Dubuque
conference, with syndicated columnist Ruben Navarrette, Jr. stating that Ramos
acted "unprofessional" and "play[ed] into every negative stereotype that
Americans subscribe to about Mexicans;" Fox News media critic Howard Kurtz
stating that Ramos had behaved "like a heckler;" CNN political commentator
Jeffrey Lord accusing Ramos of playing the "race card" despite being a "blue-
eyed, light-skinned[...] European Mexican" and "dividing the country by race;"
and Politico writer Marc Caputo calling Ramos biased for his open support for
immigration reform, although _Intercept_ writer Glenn Greenwald defended him,
pointing out American journalists such as Thomas Paine and Edward R. Murrow
who have balanced opinion and advocacy. Ramos stated in regards to his
approach to journalism, "Our position is clearly pro-Latino or pro-immigrant
... We are simply being the voice of those who don't have a
voice";[50][51][52] in an October 2015 _New Yorker_ interview, Ramos also
noted that Latino Americans "have almost no political representation",
specifically criticizing Republican candidates Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz for
not "defend[ing] the undocumented."[3]

A situation similar to that of the Dubuque incident involving Ramos occurred
on October 24, 2015, as news crews belonging to Noticias Univision and Miami
owned-and-operated station WLTV-DT – although the division and station were
reportedly given media clearance to cover the event – was ordered to leave a
campaign event held for Trump at the hotel on the Trump National Doral Miami
complex (located near Univision's Doral studios) by an off-duty police officer
who informed them that they were not allowed on the property.[53][54]

