The **_droungarios_ of the Fleet** (Greek: δρουγγάριος τοῦ πλοΐμου/τῶν
πλοΐμων, _droungarios tou ploïmou/tōn ploïmōn_; after the 11th century
δρουγγάριος τοῦ στόλου, _droungarios tou stolou_ ),[1] sometimes anglicized as
**Drungary of the Fleet** , was the commander of the Imperial Fleet (βασιλικὸς
στόλος, _basilikos stolos_ , or βασιλικὸν πλόϊμον, _basilikon ploïmon_ ), the
central division of the Byzantine navy stationed at the capital of
Constantinople, as opposed to the provincial (thematic) fleets.[2] From the
late 11th century, when the Byzantine fleets were amalgamated into a single
force under the _megas doux_ , the post, now known as the **Grand
_droungarios_ of the Fleet** (μέγας δρουγγάριος τοῦ στόλου, _megas droungarios
tou stolou_ ), became the second-in-command of the _megas doux_ and continued
in this role until the end of the Byzantine Empire.

In response to the Muslim conquests, some time in the latter half of the 7th
century, the bulk of the Byzantine navy was formed into a single command, the
great fleet of the _Karabisianoi_ (Greek: Καραβισιάνοι, "the Ships' Men"),
commanded, like the land themes that appeared around the same time, by a
_stratēgos_ ( _stratēgos tōn karabōn/karabisianōn_ , "general of the
ships/ships' men").[3] The _Karabisianoi_ , however, proved inadequate and
were replaced in the early 8th century by a more complex system composed of
three elements, which, with minor alterations, survived until the 11th
century: a central fleet based at Constantinople; a few regional naval
commands, namely the maritime Theme of the Cibyrrhaeots and a number of
independent commands under a _droungarios_ , which eventually evolved into the
maritime themes of the Aegean Sea and of Samos in the course of the 9th
century; and a greater number of local squadrons in the land themes, charged
with purely defensive and police tasks and subordinate to the local thematic
governors.[4]

A fleet was based in Constantinople at least since the 7th century, and indeed
played a central role in the repulsion of the two Arab sieges of
Constantinople in 674–678 and 717–718,[5] but the exact date of the
establishment of the Imperial Fleet (βασιλικὸς στόλος, _basilikos stolos_ , or
βασιλικὸν πλόϊμον, _basilikon ploïmon_ ) as a distinct command is unclear. The
Irish historian J. B. Bury, followed by the French Byzaninist Rodolphe
Guilland, considered it "not improbable" that the Imperial Fleet existed as a
subordinate command under the _stratēgos tōn karabisianōn_ already in the 7th
century.[2][6] Certainly the _droungarios_ of the Fleet first appears in the
_Taktikon Uspensky_ of c. 842/43;[6] and as there is little evidence for major
fleets operating from Constantinople during the 8th century, the Greek
Byzantinist Hélène Ahrweiler dated the fleet's creation to the early 9th
century.[7] From that point on, the Imperial Fleet formed the main naval
reserve force and provided the core of various expeditionary fleets.[8]

In the _Taktikon Uspensky_ , the _droungarios_ of the Fleet is positioned
relatively lowly in the hierarchy, coming after all the senior military and
civilian officials, placed between the _prōtostratōr_ and the _ek prosōpou_ of
the themes. By the time of the 899 _Klētorologion_ of Philotheos, however, he
had risen considerably in importance, being placed variously either
immediately before or after the _logothetēs tou dromou_ and in the 35th or
38th position of the overall hierarchy, ahead of the _domestikoi_ of the guard
regiments ( _tagmata_ ) of the _Hikanatoi_ and the _Noumeroi_ , as well as of
the various _chartoularioi_ (civil department heads). Indeed, he was not
classed with the other military commanders, whether of the themes or of the
_tagmata_ , but in the special class of military officials, the _stratarchai_
, where he is listed second, after the _hetaireiarchēs_ , the commander of the
imperial bodyguard.[9][10] This rise coincided with the revival in the
Byzantine navy's fortunes, begun under Michael III (r. 843–867) but carried to
fruition under the first two emperors of the Macedonian dynasty, Basil I the
Macedonian (r. 867–886) and Leo VI the Wise (r. 886–912).[11][12]

The _Klētorologion_ further lists his subordinate officials as comprising his
deputy or _topotērētēs_ (τοποτηρητής), the secretary or _chartoularios_
(χαρτουλάριος), the head messenger or _prōtomandatōr_ and the other messengers
(μανδάτορες, _mandatores_ ), the commanders of squadrons or _komētes_
(κόμητες; sing. κόμης, _komēs_ ), and the centurions of the individual ships
(κένταρχοι, _kentarchoi_ ; sing. κένταρχος, _kentarchos_ ). In addition, there
was a _komēs tēs hetaireias_ (κόμης τῆς ἑταιρείας), whose function is
disputed: according to Bury, he probably commanded the foreign mercenaries,
especially Rus' or Scandinavians, who served as marines, but the Greek
historian Nicolas Oikonomides considered him the head of the _droungarios_ '
personal guard.[1][12][13] According to the _De Ceremoniis_ of Emperor
Constantine VII (r. 913–959), he also had a role in imperial ceremonies, often
in association with the _droungarios tēs viglēs_. Typical dignities associated
with the post where the senior ranks of _prōtospatharios_ , _patrikios_ , and
_anthypatos_.[12]

The office reached its heyday during the 10th century, when several important
personages held it, most notably Emperor Romanos I Lekapenos (r. 920–944), who
used it as a springboard to the throne. The office continued in the 11th
century, but as the fleet was no longer very active, the _droungarios_ chiefly
commanded the Constantinopolitan fleet instead of leading expeditions; the
title was now usually referred to as _droungarios tou stolou_ (δρουγγάριος τοῦ
στόλου).[1][14] With the accession of Alexios I Komnenos (r. 1081–1118) a
major reorganization of the navy took place. With the great naval themes
having suffered a long decline as military formations, Alexios gathered the
remnants of the provincial fleets and amalgamated them with the Imperial Fleet
into a single force based in Constantinople, and placed it under the command
of the _megas doux_.[15]

The post of the _droungarios_ of the Fleet remained in existence, now with the
addition of the prefix _megas_ ("grand"). According to the mid-14th century
_Book of Offices_ of Pseudo-Kodinos, he "has the same relation to the _megas
doux_ as the _megas droungarios tēs viglēs_ had to the _megas domestikos_ ",
i.e., he was the second in command. He was apparently in charge of subordinate
_droungarioi_ , who however were of very lowly rank and are rarely mentioned
in the sources. Although reduced in significance in comparison to its heyday,
the _megas droungarios tou stolou_ remained important, ranking 32nd in the
overall hierarchy in the _Book of Offices_.[1][16][17] Pseudo-Kodinos gives
his ceremonial costume at the time as follows: a gold-embroidered _skiadion_
hat, a plain silk _kabbadion_ kaftan, and a _skaranikon_ (domed hat) covered
in golden and lemon-yellow silk and decorated with gold wire and images of the
emperor in front and rear, respectively depicted enthroned and on horseback.
He bore no staff of office ( _dikanikion_ ).[16][18]

A number of holders are known only by their surviving seals of office, and can
only approximately be dated:

  *[c.]: circa
  *[r]: reign

