**Olympic Channel** (branded as **Olympic Channel: Home of Team USA** ) is an
American pay television sports channel owned by the NBC Olympics division of
NBC Sports and the United States Olympic Committee. It is dedicated to Olympic
sports, and is a franchise of the International Olympic Committee's (IOC)
Olympic Channel operation. It is exclusively broadcast in 1080i high
definition; providers who intend to provide a standard definition simulcast of
the network must downscale the HD feed at their headend level.[1]

The network was founded in 2003 as **Bravo HD+** , which aired programs from
the fellow NBC Universal network Bravo that had been produced in high
definition. In 2004, the network was re-branded as **Universal HD** , serving
as an outlet for HD broadcasts of programming from NBCUniversal channels, and
library films. Universal HD rebranded to the Olympic Channel on July 15, 2017.

The channel was launched on July 31, 2003 as **Bravo HD+** , serving as a
high-definition companion service to Bravo. On December 1, 2004, the network
was rebranded as **Universal HD** , shifting its focus towards library
content, particularly from Universal Pictures and other NBC Universal
channels.[2]

In June 2017, NBCUniversal announced that Universal HD would be rebranding to
the Olympic Channel on July 15, 2017. These reports came in response to
changing market conditions in the U.S. television industry, including the
growth of "skinny" over-the-top linear television services delivered over the
internet (such as DirecTV Now and Sling TV), and an overall decline in "niche"
channels that originate little to no original programming.[3][4]

The U.S. version of Olympic Channel is a franchise of the IOC's Olympic
Channel network operated in conjunction with NBC Sports and the United States
Olympic Committee. The channel carries coverage of competitions in Olympic
sports that take place outside of the Olympic Games (such as world
championships), and other programming focusing on Olympic athletes. It draws
from programming commissioned for the international version of Olympic
Channel, original programming produced by the USOC, and the archives of
NBC.[5][6]

The rebranding occurred on the morning of July 15, 2017; its launch weekend
programming included coverage of events in the 2017 World Aquatics
Championships, the 2017 FIVB Volleyball World Grand Prix, the 2017 World Para
Athletics Championships and the 2017 IAAF Diamond League. Besides Xfinity,
providers who carried the channel at launch included Altice, AT&T U-verse,
DirecTV, Dish Network, Spectrum, and Verizon Fios, along with Hulu's live TV
service; NBC stated that it would be available in 35 million households at
launch.[7]

The network carried news and highlights during the 2018 Winter Olympics (with
full event coverage delegated to other NBCUniversal networks), including the
Jimmy Roberts-hosted studio program _Winter Olympics Daily_ , the daily medals
ceremony, and the Olympic Broadcasting Services (OBS) produduction _Olympic
Channel News_.[8] The network participated in NBCSN's event coverage of the
2018 Winter Paralympics.[9][10]

Most of the programs broadcast by Universal HD were first aired by one of
NBCUniversal's pay-TV networks, including Bravo, USA Network, Syfy and Chiller
before their HD simulcast networks were launched. In its early years, it
carried sports coverage from USA in the HD format, including its rights to The
Masters, tennis's US Open, and the Westminster Kennel Club Dog Show[11]. Early
in the high-definition era it also acquired rights to short-run early-to-mid
2000s network series such as CBS's _Clubhouse_ and UPN's _Sex, Love& Secrets_
to fill out its schedule.

In July 2007, the network announced a partnership with then-sister network
Sundance Channel to carry a weekly block of their content from August 1
through December 26, 2007, which was sponsored by Microsoft.[12] It also, as
part of a consortium of other NBC Universal networks and Sundance Channel,
broadcast the entirety of the 2007 Live Earth concerts in high definition.[13]

In November 2015, Universal Sports, a sports channel owned by InterMedia
Partners with a minority stake held by NBC, ceased operations. NBC Sports
acquired the rights to the content that was previously held by the channel,
which consisted primarily of competitions in Olympic sports, and dispersed
across Universal HD, NBCSN, and NBC Sports Live Extra.[14][15] It also carried
tape-delayed repeats of WWE's weekly series, including _Raw_ and _SmackDown_ ,
which aired back-to-back on Saturday evenings. It also carried repeats of
NBC's package of Notre Dame football home games before the conversion of the
former OLN/Versus to NBCSN.

