The **Orient** is a historical term for the _East_ , traditionally comprising
anything that belongs to the Eastern world, in relation to Europe, the
Occident. In English, it is largely a metonym for, and coterminous with, the
continent of Asia, loosely classified into the Near East, Middle East and Far
East: the geographical and ethno-cultural regions now known as West Asia,
South Asia, East Asia, and Southeast Asia. Originally, the term _Orient_ was
used to designate the Near East, and later its meaning evolved and expanded,
designating also the Middle East or the Far East.

The term **oriental** is often used to describe objects from the Orient.
However, given its Eurocentric connotations and shifting, inaccurate
definition through the ages, it may be considered offensive as a label for
people from East Asia.[1][2][3][4][5][6][7][8][9]

The term "Orient" derives from the Latin word _oriens_ meaning "east" (lit.
"rising" < _orior_ " rise"). The use of the word for "rising" to refer to the
east (where the sun rises) has analogs from many languages: compare the terms
"Levant" (< French _levant_ "rising"), "Vostok" Russian: Восток (< Russian
_voskhod_ Russian: восход "sunrise"), "Anatolia" (< Greek _anatole_ ),
"mizrahi" in Hebrew ("zriha" meaning sunrise), "sharq" Arabic: شرق‎ (< Arabic
__yashriq__ يشرق "rise", __shurūq__ Arabic: شروق‎ "rising"), "shygys" Kazakh:
шығыс (< Kazakh _shygu_ Kazakh: шығу "come out"), Turkish: _doğu_ (< Turkish
_doğmak_ to be born; to rise), Chinese: 東 (pinyin: _dōng_ , a pictograph of
the sun rising behind a tree[10]) and "The Land of the Rising Sun" to refer to
Japan. Also, many ancient temples, including pagan temples and the Jewish
Temple in Jerusalem, were built with their main entrances facing the East.
This tradition was carried on in Christian churches. To situate them in such a
manner was to "orient" them in the proper direction. When something was facing
the correct direction, it was said to be in the proper _orientation_.[
_citation needed_ ]

Another explanation of the term stems from Rome during the Roman Empire,
specifically the Eastern Roman Empire, or the "Roman Orient", during the
Byzantine Empire. Although the original East-West (or Orient-Occident) line
was the Italian Peninsula's East Coast, around 600 AD this would shift to the
City of Rome. Any area below the City of Rome was considered the Orient, as
well as the ethnicities inhabiting the land, such as Dalmatian Italians,
(modern Neapolitans along with Sicilians, Libyans, Moroccans, Greeks, etc.),
as well as everything East of Southern Italy, hence the Italian name "Italia
nord-orientale" (in English Northeast Italy) for Le Tre Venezie (the 3
Venices) located above the Roman latitude line separating it from modern
Abruzzo; the beginning of the Orient in the East, while Lazio is its beginning
in the West of the Italian Peninsula.[ _citation needed_ ]

The opposite term "Occident" derives from the Latin word _occidens_ , meaning
_west_ (lit. _setting_ < _occido_ _fall/set_ ). This term meant the west
(where the sun sets) but has fallen into disuse in English, in favor of
"Western world".

Territorialization of the Roman term _Orient_ occurred during the reign of
emperor Diocletian (284-305), when the Diocese of the Orient (Latin:
_Dioecesis Orientis_ ) was formed. Later in the 4th century, the Praetorian
prefecture of the Orient (Latin: _Praefectura Praetorio Orientis_ ) was also
formed, including most of the Eastern Roman Empire, from the Thrace eastwards;
its easternmost part was the original _Diocese of the Orient_ , corresponding
roughly to the region of Syria.

Over time, the common understanding of "the Orient" has continually shifted
eastwards, as European people traveled farther into Asia. It finally reached
the Pacific Ocean, in what Westerners came to call "the Far East". These
shifts in time and identification sometimes confuse the scope (historical and
geographic) of Oriental Studies. Yet there remain contexts where "the Orient"
and "Oriental" have kept their older meanings (e.g., "Oriental spices"
typically are from the regions extending from the Middle East to sub-
continental India to Indo-China). Travelers may again take the Orient Express
train from Paris to its terminus in the European part of Istanbul, a route
established in the early 20th century.

In European historiography, the meaning of "the Orient" changed in scope
several times. Originally, the term referred to Egypt, the Levant, and
adjoining areas.[11] as far west as Morocco. During the 1800s, India, and to a
lesser extent China, began to displace the Levant as the primary subject of
Orientalist research. By the mid-20th century, Western scholars generally
considered "the Orient" as just East Asia, Southeast Asia, and eastern Central
Asia.[11] As recently as the early 20th century, the term "Orient" often
continued to be used in ways that included North Africa. Today, the term
primarily evokes images of China, Korea, Japan, Vietnam, Mongolia, and
peninsular Southeast Asia.[11] Throughout the history of the changing sense of
the term, "the Orient" was never equivalent to Asia as a whole. "The Orient"
being largely a cultural term, large parts of Asia—Siberia most notably—were
excluded from the scholarly notion of "the Orient".[11]

Equally valid terms for the Orient still exist in the English language in such
collocations as Oriental studies (now Asian Studies in some countries).

The adjectival term Oriental has been used by the West to mean cultures,
peoples, countries, Asian rugs, and goods from the Orient. "Oriental" means
generally "eastern". It is a traditional designation (especially when
capitalized) for anything belonging to the Orient or "East" (for Asia), and
especially of its Eastern culture. It indicated the eastern direction in
historical astronomy, often abbreviated "Ori".[12] In contemporary American
English, _Oriental_ usually refers to things from the parts of East Asia
traditionally occupied by East Asians and most Central Asians and Southeast
Asians racially categorized as "Mongoloid". This excludes Jews, Indians,
Arabs, and most other South or West Asian peoples. Because of historical
discrimination against Chinese, Korean and Japanese, in some parts of the
United States, some people consider the term derogatory. For example,
Washington state prohibits the word "Oriental" in legislation and government
documents, preferring the word "Asian" instead.[13]

In more local uses, "oriental" is also used for eastern parts of countries,
for example Morocco's Oriental Region. Oriental is also used as an adjective
akin to "eastern", especially in the Spanish-speaking world. For example, the
Philippine islands of Mindoro and Negros are each divided into two provinces
whose titles include the words "oriental" and "occidental" respectively. The
official name of Uruguay is the República Oriental del Uruguay or Oriental
Republic of Uruguay because it is east of the Uruguay River.[14]

Since the 19th century, "orientalist" has been the traditional term for a
scholar of Oriental studies; however, the use in English of "Orientalism" to
describe academic "Oriental studies" is rare: the _Oxford English Dictionary_
cites only one such usage, by Lord Byron in 1812. Orientalism is more widely
used to refer to the works of the many 19th-century artists who specialized in
"Oriental" subjects, often drawing on their travels to North Africa and
Western Asia. Artists as well as scholars were already described as
"Orientalists" in the 19th century. In 1978, Palestinian-American scholar
Edward Said published his influential and controversial book, _Orientalism_ ;
he used the term to describe a pervasive Western tradition, both academic and
artistic, of prejudiced outsider interpretations of the Arab and Muslim
worlds, shaped by the attitudes of European imperialism in the 18th and 19th
centuries.[15]

In British English, the term _Oriental_ is used to refer to people from East
and Southeast Asia (such as those from China, Japan, Korea, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, Mongolia
and Laos). "Asian" in Great Britain generally refers to people who come from
South Asia (in particular Pakistan, India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka and
Maldives), since British Asians make up approximately 6.9% of the population
within the United Kingdom.[16] "Orientals" refers exclusively to people of
East and Southeast Asian origin, who comprise 0.7% of the UK population as a
whole, and 5.3% of the non-European population. Of these, the majority are of
Chinese descent.[17] It is not generally considered to be an offensive term
and is used by the British police and other agencies to describe persons of
East or Southeast Asian appearance.[18]

_Orient_ is also a word for the lustre of a fine pearl.[18] Hong Kong, a
former British colony, has been called "Pearl of the Orient".

Distinct within American culture, some American English speakers consider the
term "Oriental" to be a pejorative and disparaging term when used to describe
a person[1]. John Kuo Wei Tchen, director of the Asian/Pacific/American
Studies Program and Institute at New York University, said the basic criticism
of the term developed in the U.S. in the 1970s. Tchen has said: "With the
U.S.A. anti-war movement in the '60s and early '70s, many Asian Americans
identified the term 'Oriental' with a Western process of racializing Asians as
forever opposite 'others'."[19] In a 2009 American press release related to
legislation aimed at removing the term "oriental" from official documents of
the State of New York, Governor David Paterson said: "The word 'oriental' does
not describe ethnic origin, background or even race; in fact, it has deep and
demeaning historical roots".[20]

In 2016, President Barack Obama signed legislation striking the word from
federal law.[21]

In Australian English, the term "Asian" generally refers to people of East
Asian or Southeast Asian descent, such as those of Chinese, Korean, Japanese,
Vietnamese, Thai, or Filipino descent. Persons of Pakistani, Sri Lankan, and
most other South Asian descent are referred to by their respective demonym,
but without explicit knowledge, those people are indeterminately inferred as
"Indian".

In German, _Orient_ is usually used synonymously with the area between the
Near East and East Asia, including Israel, the Arab world, and Greater Persia.

The term _Asiaten_ (English: Asians) means Asian people in general. Another
word for Orient in German is _Morgenland_ (now mainly poetic), which literally
translates as "morning land". The antonym "Abendland" (rarely: "Okzident") is
also mainly poetic, and refers to (Western) Europe.

