**Oscoda** is an unincorporated community in the U.S. state of Michigan
located on the northern side of the Au Sable River where it enters Lake Huron.
The community of Au Sable is on the other side of the river. Oscoda is in
Oscoda Township in Iosco County, and not in Oscoda County, which is to the
northwest. The 1990 census population was 1,061, although 3,000 personnel were
stationed at nearby Wurtsmith Air Force Base. Oscoda is a census-designated
place (CDP) for statistical purposes. As of the 2000 census (several years
after the closure of the air force base), the population was 992, and in 2010
the population was 903.[3] The post office at Oscoda first opened with the
name AuSable on September 23, 1856. The name changed to Oscoda on July 1,
1875.[4]

Nearby is the Lumberman's Monument, in honor of the lumberjacks that first
populated the area. The state of Michigan has designated Oscoda as the
official home of Paul Bunyan due to the earliest documented publications in
the _Oscoda Press_ , August 10, 1906, by James MacGillivray (later revised and
published in _The Detroit News_ in 1910).[5]

Wurtsmith Air Force Base (originally Camp Skeel) was located just northwest of
the community from 1923 to 1993. Wurtsmith was the site of the Strategic Air
Command's 379th Bombardment Wing, consisting of one nuclear-armed B-52 bomber
squadron and one air refueling squadron equipped with KC-135s. The Charter
Township of Oscoda created a redevelopment authority with the cooperation of
the Michigan Legislature. The Wurtsmith Renaissance Zone was created in 1997,
which exempted businesses and residents of the 5,000 acres (20 km2) zone from
all state and most local taxes.

The Oscoda–Wurtsmith Airport is now a public airport. It occupies a portion of
the base and is primarily used for cargo and light general aviation
activities.[6] Other tenants include the Aune Medical Center, Alcona Health
Center Dental Clinic, Alpena Community College, Yankee Air Force Museum -
Wurtsmith Division,[7] and numerous private businesses. Some of the former
military housing units have been refurbished and now serve as a major
population base in the Oscoda area.

Oscoda is notable for being featured in the 2002 documentary film _Bowling for
Columbine_ , in a scene where Michael Moore interviews two young residents in
a local pool and billiard parlor. Eric Harris, one of the shooters in the
Columbine High School Massacre, spent some of his early years in Oscoda while
his father was serving in the U.S. Air Force.[8]

According to the United States Census Bureau, the CDP has a total area of 0.97
square miles (2.5 km2), of which 0.89 square miles (2.3 km2) are land and 0.1
square miles (0.2 km2), or 8.21%, are water.[3]

Oscoda is considered part of Northern Michigan and is near the Huron National
Forest, which offers outdoor recreational opportunities such as hunting,
swimming, cross-country skiing, boating and fishing. The forest contains 330
miles (530 km) of hiking trails.

As of the census[1] of 2000, there were 992 people, 460 households, and 260
families residing in the CDP. The population density was 1,135.7 per square
mile (440.2/km²). There were 599 housing units at an average density of 685.8
per square mile (265.8/km²). The racial makeup of the CDP was 94.15% White,
0.40% Black or African American, 1.21% Native American, 1.71% Asian, 0.71%
from other races, and 1.81% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any
race were 1.71% of the population.

There were 460 households out of which 24.3% had children under the age of 18
living with them, 45.9% were married couples living together, 7.8% had a
female householder with no husband present, and 43.3% were non-families. 38.9%
of all households were made up of individuals and 17.8% had someone living
alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.14
and the average family size was 2.80.

In the CDP, the population was spread out with 22.4% under the age of 18, 4.8%
from 18 to 24, 24.9% from 25 to 44, 26.0% from 45 to 64, and 21.9% who were 65
years of age or older. The median age was 44 years. For every 100 females,
there were 88.2 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 86.4
males.

The median income for a household in the CDP was $30,000, and the median
income for a family was $42,250. Males had a median income of $24,667 versus
$22,772 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $16,191. About 4.4%
of families and 8.3% of the population were below the poverty line, including
6.4% of those under age 18 and none of those age 65 or over.

This climatic region is typified by large seasonal temperature differences,
with warm to hot (and often humid) summers and cold (sometimes severely cold)
winters. According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Oscoda has a
humid continental climate, abbreviated "Dfb" on climate maps.[17]

