**Pacific Northwest National Laboratory** ( **PNNL** ) is one of the United
States Department of Energy national laboratories, managed by the Department
of Energy's (DOE) Office of Science. The main campus of the laboratory is in
Richland, Washington.

Originally named the Pacific Northwest Laboratory, PNNL was established in
1965 when research and development at the Hanford Site was separated from
other Hanford operations. In 1995, the laboratory was renamed the Pacific
Northwest National Laboratory.[2]

Pacific Northwest National Laboratory draws on signature capabilities in
chemistry, earth sciences, and data analytics to advance scientific discovery
and create solutions to the nation's toughest challenges in energy resiliency
and national security.

For the eighth year PNNL received the Office of Science's highest performance
rating, according to the DOE 2016 SC Laboratory Performance Report Card.[3]

PNNL houses several scientific user facilities and research facilities.

The Environmental Molecular Sciences Laboratory (EMSL) is a U.S. Department of
Energy national scientific user facility. EMSL provides researchers around the
world with integrated capabilities in oxide and mineral interface chemistry,
high-performance computing and computational chemistry software, mass
spectrometry, high-field magnetic resonance, and subsurface flow and
transport.[4][5]

The Bioproducts, Sciences, and Engineering Laboratory (BSEL) is a joint effort
between Washington State University and PNNL, and is located on the WSU-Tri-
Cities campus. Within BSEL, researchers are developing technology for
converting agricultural byproducts into chemicals for products like plastics,
solvents, fibers, pharmaceuticals, and fuel additives.[6]

Researchers at PNNL's Radiochemical Processing Laboratory are developing
processes to advance the cleanup of radiological and hazardous wastes; the
processing and disposal of nuclear fuels; and the production and delivery of
medical isotopes[7].

The Applied Process Engineering Laboratory (APEL) is a technology business
startup user facility, sponsored in part by PNNL. APEL provides engineering-
and manufacturing-scale space and chemical, biological, and electronic
laboratories and equipment for developing, validating, and commercializing new
products.[8]

Three research facilities were constructed on PNNL's Richland, Washington
campus to partially replace laboratory and office space PNNL had been using on
the south end of the nearby Hanford Site.

The Physical Sciences Facility, a federally funded research complex that was
designed by Flad Architects, opened in 2010 houses PNNL's research into
materials science, radiation detection, and ultra-trace analysis. P The
privately funded Computational Sciences Facility and Biological Sciences
Facility house about 310 staff who support PNNL's energy, environmental,
national security, and fundamental science research missions. These two new
facilities opened in 2009. The CSF contains scientific capabilities in
information analytics, high-performance computing, cyber security and
bioinformatics. The BSF focuses on bioenergy, environmental and soil
remediation and includes systems biology, microbial and cellular biology and
analytical interfacial chemistry.[9]

The Electricity Infrastructure Operations Center at PNNL combines software,
real-time power grid data and computation into a control room setting. The
ideas and technologies developed in the EIOC address better management of the
power grid. The EIOC also is available to utilities, vendors, government
agencies and universities interested in research, development or training.[10]

The Marine Sciences Laboratory, located at Sequim, Washington, is the DOE's
only marine laboratory. MSL provides analytical and general purpose
laboratories, as well as wet or support laboratories supplied with heated and
cooled freshwater and seawater. More than 70 engineers and scientists work on
coastal restoration and security projects, from reviving salmon habitat to
research on how shellfish could detect a bioterrorist attack. MSL also
operates a 28-foot (8.5 m) research vessel.[11]

Other PNNL research facilities include the following:

PNNL staff have received numerous awards and recognition. These achievements
include six E.O. Lawrence Awards,[12] one Coblentz Award, four Discover
Magazine Awards, two Christopher Columbus Fellowship Foundation Homeland
Security Awards,[13] and PECASE (Presidential Early Career award for
Scientists and Engineers) Awards. PNNL staff serve as editors-in-chief for
scientific journals, hold office in national and international technical
societies, and have been granted Guggenheim fellowships, Humboldt Research
Awards, and society medals. Staff have been elected to the rank of fellow in
national societies including, but not limited to, the American Association for
the Advancement of Science, American Physical Society, and the Materials
Research Society.[14][15]

PNNL was established in 1965 but traces its origins to World War II. Plutonium
production for the Manhattan Project required extensive research and
development activities at the Hanford Site. The General Electric Company began
operating the site in 1946 and consolidated R&D into the new **Hanford
Laboratory** in 1953. After GE ended its contract in 1963 to avoid conflicts
with its growing commercial nuclear business, the Atomic Energy Commission
split the Hanford contract among several organizations, awarding the
laboratory contract to Ohio-based Battelle Memorial Institute. Battelle took
over operations on January 4, 1965, and named it the **Pacific Northwest
Laboratory**.[19]

Initially, PNL’s research emphasized nuclear energy and non-destructive uses
for nuclear materials, including the design for the Fast Flux Test Facility to
test fuels and materials for the AEC’s commercial nuclear power program.
However, PNL scientists and engineers also worked on nongovernment projects.
Jim Russell patented a method for optical digital recording and playback,
eventually used in compact discs and digital video discs, while a Senior
Scientist at PNL in the 1960s and 1970s.[20] In 1969, NASA chose PNL to
measure the concentration of both solar and galactic cosmic-ray-produced
radionuclides in lunar material collected from the entire Apollo program.

In the 1970s, PNL expanded into energy, environment, health and national
security research. The shift occurred as the AEC was replaced by the Energy
Research and Development Administration (ERDA) in 1974 and the Department of
Energy in 1977. During this period, researchers at PNL developed
vitrification, a process to lock hazardous waste inside glass, and an acoustic
holography technique allowing medical personnel to view internal organs,
detect fetal abnormalities, and locate blood clots without an operation.

In the 1980s, PNL researchers introduced the first portable blood irradiator
for leukemia treatments,[21] and worked with the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center in Seattle under a cooperative research and development
agreement to develop safe and effective protocols for its use. In the
mid-1980s, PNL became one of the U.S. Department of Energy's multiprogram
laboratories.

In 1995, the laboratory was renamed the Pacific Northwest National
Laboratory.[2] The Laboratory's global environmental and nuclear
nonproliferation work moved to the forefront during the 1990s. The Pacific
Northwest Center for Global Security was established to coordinate nuclear
nonproliferation programs, research and policy work within the Laboratory and
throughout the region.[22] The Material Identification System and the
Ultrasonic Pulse Echo instrument, technologies developed at Pacific Northwest
National Laboratory, were provided to customs inspectors[23] in Eastern Europe
and former Soviet Union republics to reduce smuggling and terrorism.
Researchers also studied global climate models, including cloud formation and
radiative properties of clouds. In addition, the Laboratory created energy
efficiency centers to promote economic growth while mitigating its harmful
effects and participating on the United Nations panel on climate change
assessments.[24]

In 2007, more than 20 PNNL scientists were recognized for their contributions
to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) that received the 2007
Nobel Peace Prize in equal parts with former Vice President Al Gore.[25]

Technologies to counter acts of terrorism have progressed at PNNL in this
decade with the expansion of radiation portal monitoring technology developed
at the Laboratory. This technology is used at ports of entry around the
country to scan for and detect the presence of nuclear and radiological
materials. In 2004, The U.S. Department of Homeland Security established the
National Visualization and Analytics Center (NVAC) to advance visualization
research using computer technology to enable humans to visually synthesize and
derive insight from massive amounts of information to help the nation predict
and respond to manmade and natural disasters and terrorist incidents.

PNNL scientists are designing catalysts to use solar energy to power reactions
that turn water into hydrogen. They are incorporating the concepts of energy
matching and proton relays to design inexpensive nickel and cobalt containing
molecular complexes that catalyze that reaction. DOE has awarded $22.5 million
over five years for PNNL's new Center for Molecular Electrocatalysis, where
scientists will study catalysts that convert electrical energy into chemical
bonds and back again.[26][27]

PNNL continues to address threats to the environment by developing solutions
to capture and stabilize human-made carbon emissions along with advancements
in biomass research and biobased products that address the global need for
renewable and sustainable energy sources. On the fundamental science
forefront, PNNL's focus on genomics, proteomics, systems biology, chemical and
materials sciences is paving the way for the next decade of scientific
advancements.

Coordinates: 46°20′36″N 119°16′35″W﻿ / ﻿46.343224°N 119.276333°W﻿ / 46.343224;
-119.276333

