**Pahute Mesa** or **Paiute Mesa** is one of four major nuclear test regions
within the Nevada National Security Site (NNSS). It occupies 243 square miles
(630 km2) in the northwest corner of the NNSS in Nevada. The eastern section
is known as Area 19 and the western section as Area 20.[1][2]

The Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963 banned atmospheric nuclear testing. This
led to a requirement for an underground test area that could accommodate
higher yield tests than Yucca Flat.

Pahute Mesa was seen as ideal due to its geology and distance of over 160
kilometers (99 mi) from Las Vegas. Holes can be drilled to a depth of more
than 1,370 meters (4,490 ft). This allows tests in the megaton range to be
fully contained with minimal ground motion being felt in Las Vegas.

Pahute Mesa was thus incorporated into the boundary of the NNSS in late 1963
under an agreement between the United States Atomic Energy Commission and the
U.S. Air Force.[3]

Pahute Mesa is part of the Tonopah Basin and includes the Silent Canyon
caldera complex of the Southwest Nevada volcanic field.

Rugged terrain features and harsh winter conditions make year-round operations
difficult.

A total of 85 nuclear tests were conducted in Pahute Mesa between 1965 and
1992.[2] Three of them— _Boxcar_ , _Benham_ and _Handley_ —had a yield of over
one megaton.[2] Three tests were conducted as part of operation Plowshare and
one as part of Vela Uniform.[2]

In 1988, as a prelude to the signing of the protocols to the Threshold Test
Ban Treaty and the Peaceful Nuclear Explosions Treaty, the United States and
the Soviet Union conducted two joint tests employing proposed treaty
verification techniques. The first was _Kearsarge_ , conducted in Area 19 of
the NNSS, the second _Shagan_ , conducted at the Semipalatinsk Test Site.[2]

Shot _Greenwater_ was planned for 1993 and abandoned in place in Area 19
following 1992's testing moratorium.[4]

The following tests resulted in a release of radioactivity that was detected
outside of the NNSS.[2]

The _Schooner_ plume spread plutonium and other radionuclides across Area 20
and northward into Nellis Air Force Range.[6] According to measurements taken
in 2001, the _Schooner_ crater has the highest annual mean concentration of
radioactive tritiated water of any area of the NNSS.[7]

The _Schooner_ crater area resembles the lunar landscape. It was used along
with other areas of the NNSS to train some of the astronauts of the Apollo
program, among them Neil Armstrong, Dick Gordon, Buzz Aldrin, Dave Scott and
Rusty Schweickart. In 1970, the Apollo 16 team of John Young and Charlie Duke
trained at Schooner in the lunar rover.[8]

The Pahute Control Point is located in Area 18, south of Pahute Mesa. It was
used until 1971 to monitor tests in Pahute Mesa.

The Pahute Mesa Airstrip, also in Area 18, was used to ship supplies and
equipment to Pahute Mesa.[1]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/62/PD-icon.svg/12px-PD-
icon.svg.png) This article incorporates public domain material from websites
or documents of the United States Department of Energy.

