**Palm oil** is an edible vegetable oil derived from the mesocarp (reddish
pulp) of the fruit of the oil palms, primarily the African oil palm _Elaeis
guineensis_ ,[1] and to a lesser extent from the American oil palm _Elaeis
oleifera_ and the maripa palm _Attalea maripa_.

Palm oil is naturally reddish in color because of a high beta-carotene
content. It is not to be confused with palm kernel oil derived from the kernel
of the same fruit[2] or coconut oil derived from the kernel of the coconut
palm ( _Cocos nucifera_ ). The differences are in color (raw palm kernel oil
lacks carotenoids and is not red), and in saturated fat content: palm mesocarp
oil is 49% saturated, while palm kernel oil and coconut oil are 81% and 86%
saturated fats, respectively. However, crude red palm oil that has been
refined, bleached and deodorized, a common commodity called RBD palm oil, does
not contain carotenoids.[3] Many industrial food applications of palm oil use
fractionated components of palm oil (often listed as "modified palm oil")
whose saturation levels can reach 90%;[4] these "modified" palm oils can
become highly saturated, but are not necessarily hydrogenated.

The oil palm produces bunches containing a large number of fruits with the
fleshy mesocarp enclosing a kernel that is covered by a very hard shell. FAO
considers palm oil (coming from the pulp) and palm kernels to be primary
products. The oil extraction rate from a bunch varies from 17 to 27% for palm
oil, and from 4 to 10% for palm kernels.[5]

Along with coconut oil, palm oil is one of the few highly saturated vegetable
fats and is semisolid at room temperature.[6] Palm oil is a common cooking
ingredient in the tropical belt of Africa, Southeast Asia and parts of Brazil.
Its use in the commercial food industry in other parts of the world is
widespread because of its lower cost[7] and the high oxidative stability
(saturation) of the refined product when used for frying.[8][9] One source
reported that humans consumed an average 17 pounds (7.7 kg) of palm oil per
person in 2015.[10]

The use of palm oil in food products has attracted the concern of
environmental activist groups; the high oil yield of the trees has encouraged
wider cultivation, leading to the clearing of forests in parts of Indonesia to
make space for oil-palm monoculture.[11] This has resulted in significant
acreage losses of the natural habitat of the three surviving species of
orangutan. One species in particular, the Sumatran orangutan, has been listed
as critically endangered.[12] In 2004, an industry group called the Roundtable
on Sustainable Palm Oil was formed to work with the palm oil industry to
address these concerns.[13] Additionally, in 1992, in response to concerns
about deforestation, the Government of Malaysia pledged to limit the expansion
of palm oil plantations by retaining a minimum of half the nation's land as
forest cover.[14][15]

Humans used oil palms as far as 5,000 years back; in the late-1800s,
archaeologists discovered a substance that they concluded was originally palm
oil in a tomb at Abydos dating back to 3,000 BCE.[16] It is believed that
traders brought oil palm to Egypt.[17]

Palm oil from _E. guineensiss_ has long been recognized in West and Central
African countries, and is widely used as a cooking oil. European merchants
trading with West Africa occasionally purchased palm oil for use as a cooking
oil in Europe.

Palm oil became a highly sought-after commodity by British traders, for use as
an industrial lubricant for machinery during Britain's Industrial
Revolution.[18]

Palm oil formed the basis of soap products, such as Lever Brothers' (now
Unilever) "Sunlight" soap, and the American Palmolive brand.[19]

By around 1870, palm oil constituted the primary export of some West African
countries, although this was overtaken by cocoa in the 1880s with the
introduction of colonial European cocoa plantations.[20][21]

Palm oil, like all fats, is composed of fatty acids, esterified with glycerol.
Palm oil has an especially high concentration of saturated fat, specifically
the 16-carbon saturated fatty acid, palmitic acid, to which it gives its name.
Monounsaturated oleic acid is also a major constituent of palm oil. Unrefined
palm oil is a significant source of tocotrienol, part of the vitamin E
family.[22][23]

The approximate concentration of esterified fatty acids in palm oil is:[24]

Red palm oil is rich in carotenes, such as alpha-carotene, beta-carotene and
lycopene, which give it a characteristic dark red color.[23][25] However, palm
oil that has been refined, bleached and deodorized from crude palm oil (called
"RBD palm oil") does not contain carotenes.[3]

Many processed foods either contain palm oil or various ingredients made from
it.[26]

After milling, various palm oil products are made using refining processes.
First is fractionation, with crystallization and separation processes to
obtain solid (palm stearin), and liquid (olein) fractions.[27] Then melting
and degumming removes impurities. Then the oil is filtered and bleached.
Physical refining[ _clarification needed_ ] removes smells and coloration to
produce "refined, bleached and deodorized palm oil" (RBDPO) and free fatty
acids,[ _clarification needed_ ] which are used in the manufacture of soaps,
washing powder and other products. RBDPO is the basic palm oil product sold on
the world's commodity markets. Many companies fractionate it further to
produce palm oil for cooking oil, or process it into other products.[27]

Since the mid-1990s, **red palm oil** has been cold-pressed from the fruit of
the oil palm and bottled for use as a cooking oil, in addition to other uses
such as being blended into mayonnaise and vegetable oil.[3]

Oil produced from palm fruit is called _red palm oil_ or just _palm oil_. It
is around 50% saturated fat—considerably less than palm kernel oil—and 40%
unsaturated fat and 10% polyunsaturated fat. In its unprocessed state, red
palm oil has an intense deep red color because of its abundant carotene
content. Like palm kernel oil, red palm oil contains around 50% medium chain
fatty acids, but it also contains the following nutrients:[28]

**White palm oil** is the result of processing and refining. When refined, the
palm oil loses its deep red color. It is extensively used in food manufacture
and can be found in a variety of processed foods including peanut butter and
chips. It is often labeled as palm shortening and is used as a replacement
ingredient for hydrogenated fats in a variety of baked and fried products.

The highly saturated nature of palm oil renders it solid at room temperature
in temperate regions, making it a cheap substitute for butter or hydrogenation
vegetable oils in uses where solid fat is desirable, such as the making of
pastry dough and baked goods. The health concerns related to trans fats in
hydrogenated vegetable oils may have contributed to the increasing use of palm
oil in the food industry.[29]

Palm oil is also used in animal feed. In March 2017, a documentary made by
Deutsche Welle revealed that palm oil is used to make milk substitutes to feed
calves in dairies in the German alps. These milk substitutes contain 30% milk
powder and the remainder of raw protein made from skimmed milk powder, whey
powder, and vegetable fats, mostly coconut oil and palm oil.[30]

Palm oil is used to produce both methyl ester and hydrodeoxygenated
biodiesel.[31] Palm oil methyl ester is created through a process called
transesterification. Palm oil biodiesel is often blended with other fuels to
create palm oil biodiesel blends.[ _citation needed_ ] Palm oil biodiesel
meets the European EN 14214 standard for biodiesels.[31] Hydrodeoxygenated
biodiesel is produced by direct hydrogenolysis of the fat into alkanes and
propane. The world's largest palm oil biodiesel plant is the €550 million
Finnish-operated Neste Oil biodiesel plant in Singapore, which opened in 2011
with a capacity of 800,000 tons per year and produces hydrodeoxygenated NEXBTL
biodiesel from palm oil imported from Malaysia and Indonesia.[32][33]

Significant amounts of palm oil exports to Europe are converted to biodiesel
(as of early 2018: Indonesia: 40%, Malaysia 30%).[34][35]. In 2014, almost
half of all the palm oil in Europe was burnt as car and truck fuel.[36] As of
2018, one-half of Europe's palm oil imports were used for biodiesel.[37] Use
of palm oil as biodiesel generates three times the carbon emissions as using
fossil fuel,[38] and, for example, "biodiesel made from Indonesian palm oil
makes the global carbon problem worse, not better."[39]

The organic waste matter that is produced when processing oil palm, including
oil palm shells and oil palm fruit bunches, can also be used to produce
energy. This waste material can be converted into pellets that can be used as
a biofuel.[40] Additionally, palm oil that has been used to fry foods can be
converted into methyl esters for biodiesel. The used cooking oil is chemically
treated to create a biodiesel similar to petroleum diesel.[41]

Although palm oil is applied to wounds for its supposed antimicrobial effects,
research does not confirm its effectiveness.[42]

In 2016, the global production of palm oil was estimated at 62.6 million
tonnes, 2.7 million tonnes more than in 2015. The palm oil production value
was estimated at $US39.3 billion in 2016, a increase of $US2.4 billion (or
+7%) against the production figure recorded in the previous year.[43] Between
1962 and 1982 global exports of palm oil increased from around half a million
to 2.4 million tonnes annually and in 2008 world production of palm oil and
palm kernel oil amounted to 48 million tonnes. According to FAO forecasts by
2020 the global demand for palm oil will double, and triple by 2050.[44]

Indonesia is the world's largest producer of palm oil, surpassing Malaysia in
2006, producing more than 20.9 million tonnes.[45][46] Indonesia expects to
double production by the end of 2030.[13] At the end of 2010, 60% of the
output was exported in the form of crude palm oil.[47] FAO data shows
production increased by over 400% between 1994 and 2004, to over 8.66 million
metric tonnes.

In 2012, Malaysia, the world's second largest producer of palm oil,[48]
produced 18.79 million tonnes of crude palm oil on roughly 5,000,000 hectares
(19,000 sq mi) of land.[49][50] Though Indonesia produces more palm oil,
Malaysia is the world's largest exporter of palm oil having exported 18
million tonnes of palm oil products in 2011. China, Pakistan, the European
Union, India and the United States are the primary importers of Malaysian palm
oil products.[51]

As of 2011, Nigeria was the third-largest producer, with approximately 2.3
million hectares (5.7×10 ~~^~~ 6 acres) under cultivation. Until 1934, Nigeria
had been the world's largest producer. Both small- and large-scale producers
participated in the industry.[52][53]

Thailand is the world's third largest producer of crude palm oil, producing
approximately two million tonnes per year, or 1.2% of global output. Nearly
all of Thai production is consumed locally. Almost 85% of palm plantations and
extraction mills are in south Thailand. At year-end 2016, 4.7 to 5.8 million
rai were planted in oil palms, employing 300,000 farmers, mostly on small
landholdings of 20 rai. ASEAN as a region accounts for 52.5 million tonnes of
palm oil production, about 85% of the world total and more than 90% of global
exports. Indonesia accounts for 52.2% of world exports. Malaysian exports
total 37.9%. The biggest consumers of palm oil are India, the European Union,
and China, with the three consuming nearly 50% of world exports. Thailand's
Department of Internal Trade (DIT) usually sets the price of crude palm oil
and refined palm oil. Thai farmers have a relatively low yield compared to
those in Malaysia and Indonesia. Thai palm oil crops yield 4–17% oil compared
to around 20% in competing countries. In addition, Indonesian and Malaysian
oil palm plantations are 10 times the size of Thai plantations.[54]

In the 1960s, about 18,000 hectares (69 sq mi) were planted with palm.
Colombia has now become the largest palm oil producer in the Americas, and 35%
of its product is exported as biofuel. In 2006, the Colombian plantation
owners' association, Fedepalma, reported that oil palm cultivation was
expanding to 1,000,000 hectares (3,900 sq mi). This expansion is being funded,
in part, by the United States Agency for International Development to resettle
disarmed paramilitary members on arable land, and by the Colombian government,
which proposes to expand land use for exportable cash crops to 7,000,000
hectares (27,000 sq mi) by 2020, including oil palms. Fedepalma states that
its members are following sustainable guidelines.[55]

Some Afro-Colombians claim that some of these new plantations have been
expropriated from them after they had been driven away through poverty and
civil war, while armed guards intimidate the remaining people to further
depopulate the land, with coca production and trafficking following in their
wake.[56]

Palm is native to the wetlands of western Africa, and south Benin already
hosts many palm plantations. Its 'Agricultural Revival Programme' has
identified many thousands of hectares of land as suitable for new oil palm
export plantations. In spite of the economic benefits, Non-governmental
organisations (NGOs), such as Nature Tropicale, claim biofuels will compete
with domestic food production in some existing prime agricultural sites. Other
areas comprise peat land, whose drainage would have a deleterious
environmental impact. They are also concerned genetically modified plants will
be introduced into the region, jeopardizing the current premium paid for their
non-GM crops.[57][58]

Cameroon had a production project underway initiated by Herakles Farms in the
US.[59] However, the project was halted under the pressure of civil society
organizations in Cameroon. Before the project was halted, Herakles left the
Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil early in negotiations.[60] The project has
been controversial due to opposition from villagers and the location of the
project in a sensitive region for biodiversity.

Kenya's domestic production of edible oils covers about a third of its annual
demand, estimated at around 380,000 tonnes. The rest is imported at a cost of
around US$140 million a year, making edible oil the country's second most
important import after petroleum. Since 1993 a new hybrid variety of cold-
tolerant, high-yielding oil palm has been promoted by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations in western Kenya. As well as alleviating
the country's deficit of edible oils while providing an important cash crop,
it is claimed to have environmental benefits in the region, because it does
not compete against food crops or native vegetation and it provides
stabilisation for the soil.[61]

Ghana has a lot of palm nut species, which may become an important contributor
to the agriculture of the region. Although Ghana has multiple palm species,
ranging from local palm nuts to other species locally called agric, it was
only marketed locally and to neighboring countries. Production is now
expanding as major investment funds are purchasing plantations, because Ghana
is considered a major growth area for palm oil.

The palm oil industry has had both positive and negative impacts on workers,
indigenous peoples and residents of palm oil-producing communities. Palm oil
production provides employment opportunities, and has been shown to improve
infrastructure, social services and reduce poverty.[62][63][64] However, in
some cases, oil palm plantations have developed lands without consultation or
compensation of the indigenous people inhabiting the land, resulting in social
conflict.[65][66][67] The use of illegal immigrants in Malaysia has also
raised concerns about working conditions within the palm oil
industry.[68][69][70]

Some social initiatives use palm oil cultivation as part of poverty
alleviation strategies. Examples include the UN Food and Agriculture
Organisation's hybrid oil palm project in Western Kenya, which improves
incomes and diets of local populations,[71] and Malaysia's Federal Land
Development Authority and Federal Land Consolidation and Rehabilitation
Authority, which both support rural development.[72]

The use of palm oil in the production of biodiesel has led to concerns that
the need for fuel is being placed ahead of the need for food, leading to
malnutrition in developing nations. This is known as the food versus fuel
debate. According to a 2008 report published in the _Renewable and Sustainable
Energy Reviews_ , palm oil was determined to be a sustainable source of both
food and biofuel. The production of palm oil biodiesel does not pose a threat
to edible palm oil supplies.[73] According to a 2009 study published in the
_Environmental Science and Policy_ journal, palm oil biodiesel might increase
the demand for palm oil in the future, resulting in the expansion of palm oil
production, and therefore an increased supply of food.[74]

Palm oil cultivation has been criticized for impacts on the natural
environment,[75][76] including deforestation, loss of natural habitats,[77]
and greenhouse gas emissions[78][79] which have threatened critically
endangered species, such as the orangutan[80][81] and Sumatran tiger.[82]

Efforts to portray palm oil cultivation as sustainable have been made by
organizations including the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil,[83] an
industry lobby group, and the Malaysian government, which committed to
preserve 50% of its total land area as forest.[14]

Environmental groups such as Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth oppose the
use of palm oil biofuels, claiming that the deforestation caused by oil palm
plantations is more damaging for the climate than the benefits gained by
switching to biofuel and using the palms as carbon sinks.[84][85] While only
5% of the world's vegetable oil farmland is used for palm plantations, palm
cultivation produces 38% of the world's total vegetable oil supply.[86] In
terms of oil yield, a palm plantation is 10 times more productive than
soybean, sunflower or rapeseed cultivation because the palm fruit and kernel
both provide usable oil.[86] A 2018 study by the International Union for
Conservation of Nature (IUCN) concluded that palm oil is "here to stay" due to
its higher productivity compared with many other vegetable oils.[87]

Compared to algae (which can be grown in salt and freshwater), however, the
per unit area yield of palm oil is still 10 to 23 times lower.[88][89] IUCN
maintains that replacing palm oil with other vegetable oils would lead to
greater land spoilage, negatively affecting biodiversity.[87][90] The IUCN
advocates better practices in the palm oil industry, including the prevention
of plantations from expanding into forested regions and creating a demand for
certified and sustainable palm oil products.[90]

The Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) was created as a lobby group by
industry in 2004[91] following concerns raised by non-governmental
organizations about environmental impacts related to palm oil production. The
organization has established international standards for sustainable palm oil
production.[92] Products containing Certified Sustainable Palm Oil (CSPO) can
carry the RSPO trademark.[93] Members of the RSPO include palm oil producers,
environmental groups, and manufacturers who use palm oil in their
products.[91][92]

Palm oil growers who produce Certified Sustainable Palm Oil have been critical
of the organization because, though they have met RSPO standards and assumed
the costs associated with certification, the market demand for certified palm
oil remains low.[92][93] Low market demand has been attributed to the higher
cost of Certified Sustainable Palm Oil, leading palm oil buyers to purchase
cheaper non-certified palm oil. Palm oil is mostly fungible. In 2011, 12% of
palm oil produced was certified "sustainable", though only half of that had
the RSPO label.[94] Even with such a low proportion being certified,
Greenpeace has argued that confectioners are avoiding responsibilities on
sustainable palm oil, because it says that RSPO standards fall short of
protecting rain forests and reducing greenhouse gases.[95]

According to the Hamburg-based _Oil World_ trade journal,[ _citation needed_ ]
in 2008 global production of oils and fats stood at 160 million tonnes. Palm
oil and palm kernel oil were jointly the largest contributor, accounting for
48 million tonnes, or 30% of the total output. Soybean oil came in second with
37 million tonnes (23%). About 38% of the oils and fats produced in the world
were shipped across oceans. Of the 60 million tonnes of oils and fats exported
around the world, palm oil and palm kernel oil made up close to 60%; Malaysia,
with 45%of the market share, dominated the palm oil trade.

Previously, palm oil could be listed as "vegetable fat" or "vegetable oil" on
food labels in the European Union (EU). From December 2014, food packaging in
the EU is no longer allowed to use the generic terms "vegetable fat" or
"vegetable oil" in the ingredients list. Food producers are required to list
the specific type of vegetable fat used, including palm oil. Vegetable oils
and fats can be grouped together in the ingredients list under the term
"vegetable oils" or "vegetable fats" but this must be followed by the type of
vegetable origin (e.g., palm, sunflower, or rapeseed) and the phrase "in
varying proportions".[96]

The Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) was established in 2004[91]
following concerns raised by non-governmental organizations about
environmental impacts resulting from palm oil production. The organization has
established international standards for sustainable palm oil production.[92]
Products containing Certified Sustainable Palm Oil (CSPO) can carry the RSPO
trademark.[93] Members of the RSPO include palm oil producers, environmental
groups, and manufacturers who use palm oil in their products.[91][92]

The RSPO is applying different types of programmes to supply palm oil to
producers.[97]

GreenPalm is one of the retailers executing the book and claim supply chain
and trading programme. It guarantees that the palm oil producer is certified
by the RSPO. Through GreenPalm the producer can certify a specified amount
with the GreenPalm logo. The buyer of the oil is allowed to use the RSPO and
the GreenPalm label for sustainable palm oil on their products.[97]

Contributing significant calories as a source of fat, palm oil is a food
staple in many cuisines.[98][99][100] On average globally, humans consumed 7.7
kg (17 lb) of palm oil per person in 2015.[10] Although the relationship of
palm oil consumption to disease risk has been previously assessed, the quality
of the clinical research specifically assessing palm oil effects has been
generally poor.[101] Consequently, research has focused on the deleterious
effects of palm oil and palmitic acid consumption as sources of saturated fat
content in edible oils, leading to conclusions that palm oil and saturated
fats should be replaced with polyunsaturated fats in the diet.[102][103]

Excessive intake of palmitic acid, which makes up 44% of palm oil, increases
blood levels of low-density lipoprotein and total cholesterol, and so
increases risk of cardiovascular diseases.[102][103][104] Other reviews, the
World Health Organization, and the US National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute
have encouraged consumers to limit the consumption of palm oil, palmitic acid
and foods high in saturated fat.[98][102][104][105]

