**Palo Alto** (/ˌpæloʊ ˈæltoʊ/) is a charter city located in the northwest
corner of Santa Clara County, California, United States, in the San Francisco
Bay Area. Palo Alto means _tall stick_ in Spanish; the city is named after a
coastal redwood tree called El Palo Alto.

The city was established by Leland Stanford Sr. when he founded Stanford
University, following the death of his son, Leland Stanford Jr. Palo Alto
includes portions of Stanford University and shares its borders with East Palo
Alto, Mountain View, Los Altos, Los Altos Hills, Stanford, Portola Valley, and
Menlo Park. As of the 2010 census, the city's total resident population is
64,403.[5] Palo Alto is one of the five most expensive cities in the United
States to live in[7][8] and its residents are among the highest educated in
the country.[9]

Palo Alto is headquarters to a number of high-technology companies, including
Hewlett-Packard (HP), Space Systems/Loral, VMware, Tesla, Ford Research and
Innovation Center, PARC, IDEO, Skype, Palantir Technologies, Houzz, and
Lockheed Martin Advanced Technology Center.[10] Palo Alto has also served as
an incubator and as headquarters to several other prominent high-technology
companies such as Apple,[11] Google,[12] Facebook, Logitech,[13] Intuit,
Pinterest, and PayPal.

Prior to the arrival of Europeans, the Ohlone lived on the San Francisco
peninsula; in particular, the Puichon Ohlone lived in the Palo Alto area. The
area of modern Palo Alto was first recorded by the 1769 party of Gaspar de
Portolá, a 63-man, 200-horse expedition from San Diego to Monterey. The group
overshot Monterey in the fog and when they reached modern-day Pacifica,
ascended Sweeney Ridge and saw the San Francisco Bay. Portolá descended from
Sweeney Ridge southeast down San Andreas Creek to Laguna Creek (now Crystal
Springs Reservoirs) and the Filoli estate, and thence to the San Francisquito
Creek watershed, ultimately camping from November 6–11, 1769 by a tall redwood
later to be known as El Palo Alto. Thinking the bay was too wide to cross, the
group retraced their journey to Monterey, and never became aware of the Golden
Gate entrance to the Bay.[14][ _citation needed_ ]

In 1777, Father Junipero Serra established the Mission Santa Clara de Asis,
whose northern boundary was San Francisquito Creek and whose lands included
modern Palo Alto. The area was under the control of the viceroy of Mexico and
ultimately under the control of Spain. On November 29, 1777, Pueblo de San
Jose de Guadalupe (now the city of San Jose a few miles to the south of what
was to be Palo Alto) was established by order of the viceroy despite the
displeasure of the local mission. The Mexican War of Independence ending in
1821 led to Mexico becoming an independent country, though San Jose did not
recognize rule by the new Mexico until May 10, 1825. Mexico proceeded to sell
off or grant much of the mission land.[15]

During the Mexican–American War, the United States seized Alta California in
1846; however, this was not legalized until the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
was signed on July 4, 1848. Mexican citizens in the area could choose to
become United States citizens, and their land grants were to be recognized if
they chose to do so (though many legal disputes arose over this).

The land grant, Rancho Rinconada del Arroyo de San Francisquito, of about
2,230-acre (9.0 km2) on the lower reaches of San Francisquito Creek (i.e.,
parts of modern Menlo Park and northern Palo Alto) was given to Maria Antonia
Mesa in 1841. She and her husband Rafael Soto (who had died in 1839) had
settled in 1835 near present day Newell and Middlefield roads and sold
supplies. In 1839, their daughter María Luisa Soto (1817–1883) married John
Coppinger, who was to be, in 1841, the grantee of Rancho Cañada de Raymundo
(in modern San Mateo county). Upon Coppinger's death in 1847, Maria inherited
it and later married a visiting boat captain, John Greer. Greer owned a home
on the site that is now Town & Country Village on Embarcadero and El Camino
Real. Greer Avenue and Court are named for him.

To the south of the Sotos, the brothers Secundino and Teodoro Robles in 1849
bought Rancho Rincon de San Francisquito from José Peña, the 1841 grantee.[16]
The grant covered the area south of Rancho Rinconada del Arroyo de San
Francisquito to more or less present day Mountain View. The grant was bounded
on the south by Mariano Castro's Rancho Pastoria de las Borregas grant across
San Antonio Road. This later became the Robles Rancho, which constitutes about
80% of Palo Alto and Stanford University today. In 1863, it was whittled down
in the courts to 6,981 acres (28.25 km2). Stories say the grand hacienda was
built on the former meager adobe of José Peña near Ferne off San Antonio Road,
midway between Middlefield and Alma Street.[17] Their hacienda hosted fiestas
and bull fights. It was ruined in the 1906 earthquake and its lumber was used
to build a large barn nearby, which was said to have lingered until the early
1950s. On April 10, 1853, 250 acres (1.0 km2), comprising the present day
Barron Park, Matadero Creek and Stanford Business Park, was sold for $2,000 to
Elisha Oscar Crosby, who called his new property Mayfield Farm. The name of
Mayfield was later attached to the community that started nearby. On September
23, 1856, the Crosby land was transferred to Sarah Wallis to satisfy a debt he
owed her.[18] In 1880, Secundino Robles, father to twenty-nine children, still
lived just south of Palo Alto, near the location of the present-day San
Antonio Shopping Center in Mountain View.

Many of the Spanish names in the Palo Alto area represent the local heritage,
descriptive terms and former residents. Pena Court, Miranda Avenue, which was
essentially Foothill Expwy, was the married name of Juana Briones and the name
occurs in Courts and Avenues and other street names in Palo Alto and Mountain
View in the quadrant where she owned vast areas between Stanford University,
Grant Road in Mountain View and west of El Camino Real. Yerba Buena was to her
credit. Rinconada was the major Mexican land grant name.

The township of **Mayfield** was formed in 1855, around the site of a
stagecoach stop and saloon known as "Uncle Jim's Cabin" near the intersection
of El Camino Real and today's California Avenue in what is now southern Palo
Alto.[19] In October 1863 the San Francisco to San Jose railroad had been
built as far as Mayfield and service started between San Francisco and
Mayfield (the station is now California Avenue); train service all the way to
San Jose started in January 1864.[20][21] El Camino became Main Street; the
northeast–southwest cross streets were named for Civil War heroes, with
California Avenue originally being Lincoln Street. The town had its own
newspaper by 1869 (the _Mayfield Enterprise_ , in English and Spanish),
incorporated in 1903, and had breweries and a cannery.[19]

In 1875, French financier Jean Baptiste Paulin Caperon, better known as Peter
Coutts, purchased land in Mayfield and four other parcels around three sides
of today's College Terrace – more than a thousand acres extending from today's
Page Mill Road to Serra Street and from El Camino Real to the foothills.
Coutts named his property Ayrshire Farm. His fanciful 50-foot-tall brick tower
near Matadero Creek likely marked the south corner of his property. Leland
Stanford started buying land in the area in 1876 for a horse farm, called the
Palo Alto Stock Farm. Stanford bought Ayrshire Farm in 1882.[22] In 1891 he
and his wife, Jane, founded Stanford University, dedicated to their son Leland
Stanford Jr., who had died of typhoid fever at age 15 in 1884. In 1886, he
proposed founding it in Mayfield. However, he had one condition: alcohol had
to be banned from the town. Known for its 13 rowdy saloons, Mayfield rejected
his request. This led him to drive the formation of a new temperance town with
the help of his friend Timothy Hopkins of the Southern Pacific Railroad, who
in 1887 bought 740 acres (3.0 km2) of private land for the new townsite. This
Hopkins Tract, bounded by El Camino Real, San Francisquito Creek, Boyce,
Channing, Melville, and Hopkins Avenues, and Embarcadero Road,[23] was
proclaimed a local Heritage District during Palo Alto's centennial in 1994.
Stanford set up his university, Stanford University, and a train stop (on
University Avenue) by his new town. This new community was initially called
University Park (the name "Palo Alto" at that time was attached to what is now
College Terrace), but was incorporated in 1894 with the name Palo Alto. With
Stanford's support, Palo Alto grew to the size of Mayfield. After long-running
strife in Mayfield and a Mayfield ordinance banning saloons that took effect
in January 1905, on July 2, 1925, Palo Alto voters approved the annexation of
Mayfield and the two communities were officially consolidated on July 6,
1925.[19] As a result Palo Alto has two downtown areas: one along University
Avenue and one along California Avenue.

The _Mayfield News_ wrote its own obituary four days later:

It is with a feeling of deep regret that we see on our streets today those who
would sell, or give, our beautiful little city to an outside community. We
have watched Mayfield grow from a small hamlet, when Palo Alto was nothing
more than a hayfield, to her present size … and it is with a feeling of sorrow
that we contemplate the fact that there are those who would sell or give the
city away.

Palo Alto continued to annex more land, including the Stanford Shopping Center
area in 1953. Stanford Research Park, Embarcadero Road northeast of Bayshore,
and the West Bayshore/San Antonio Road area were also annexed during the
1950s. Large amounts of land west of Foothill Expressway were annexed between
1959 and 1968; this is mostly undeveloped and includes Foothills Park and
Arastradero Preserve. The last major annexations were of **Barron Park** in
1975 and, in 1979, a large area of marshlands bordering the bay.[24]

Many of Stanford University's first faculty members settled in the
Professorville neighborhood of Palo Alto. Professorville, now a registered
national historic district, is bounded by Kingsley, Lincoln, and Addison
Avenues and the cross streets of Ramona, Bryant, and Waverley. The district
includes a large number of well-preserved residences dating from the 1890s,
including 833 Kingsley, 345 Lincoln and 450 Kingsley. 1044 Bryant was the home
of Russell Varian, co-inventor of the Klystron tube. The Federal Telegraph
laboratory site, situated at 218 Channing, is a California Historical Landmark
recognizing Lee de Forest's 1911 invention of the vacuum tube and electronic
oscillator at that location. While not open to the public, the garage that
housed the launch of Hewlett Packard is located at 367 Addison Avenue. Hewlett
Packard recently restored the house and garage. A second historic district on
Ramona Street can be found downtown between University and Hamilton Avenues.
The Palo Alto Chinese School is the oldest in the entire Bay Area. It is also
home to the second oldest opera company in California, the West Bay Opera.

Palo Alto, California is also home to a long standing baseball tradition: The
Palo Alto Oaks. The Palo Alto Oaks are a collegiate, summer baseball club that
have been in the Bay Area since 1950, 8 years longer than the San Francisco
Giants. The Oaks were originally managed by Tony Makjavich for 49 years.[25]
The Oaks were going to fold before the summer 2016 season but were taken on by
Daniel Palladino and Whaylan Price, Bay Area baseball coaches, who did not
want to see the team die. The Oaks have a rich history within the Palo Alto
community.[26]

Palo Alto is in the south-eastern section of the San Francisco Peninsula.

It consists of two large parcels of land connected by a narrow corridor. The
southern inland section, located south of Interstate 280, is hilly, rural, and
lightly populated and is the site of Pearson-Arastradero Preserve and
Foothills Park both part of the Palo Alto park system and also large parts of
the Los Trancos and Monte Bello Open Space Preserves part of the Midpeninsula
Regional Open Space District. The city extends as far as Skyline Boulevard
along the ridge of the Santa Cruz Mountains.

The northern more densely populated parcel is bordered by San Francisquito
Creek (with Menlo Park and East Palo Alto in adjacent San Mateo County beyond)
to the north, San Francisco Bay to the north-east, Mountain View, Los Altos,
and Los Altos Hills to the east and south-east and Stanford University to the
south-west and west. Several major transit routes cross this parcel from the
north-west to the south-east. The biggest and closest to the bay is the
Bayshore Freeway and going inland are Alma Street/Central Expressway, El
Camino Real, and Foothill Expressway. Interstate 280 is parallel and crosses
the narrow corridor of land that connects the two parcels that make up Palo
Alto. Somewhat perpendicular to these roads are Sand Hill Road from El Camino
until it crosses San Francisquito Creek into Menlo Park, Embarcadero Road,
Oregon Expressway/Page Mill Road, Arastradero Road/East Charleston Road, and
San Antonio Road (the last forms part of the boundary with Mountain View).

According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of
25.8 square miles (67 km2). 23.9 square miles (62 km2) of it is land and 1.9
square miles (4.9 km2) (or 7.38%) is water.

The official elevation is 30 feet (9 m) above sea level,[27] but the city
boundaries reach well into the peninsula hills.

Palo Alto is crossed by several creeks that flow north in the direction of the
San Francisco Bay, Adobe Creek near its eastern boundary, San Francisquito
Creek on its western boundary, and Matadero Creek in between the other two.
Arastradero Creek is tributary to Matadero Creek, and Barron Creek is now
diverted to Adobe Creek just south of Highway 101 by a diversion channel. The
San Francisquito Creek mainstem is formed by the confluence of Corte Madera
Creek and Bear Creek not far below Searsville Dam. Further downstream, Los
Trancos Creek is tributary to San Francisquito Creek below Interstate 280.

Palo Alto has a number of significant natural habitats, including estuarine,
riparian, and oak forest. Many of these habitats are visible in Foothills
Park, which is owned by the city. The Charleston Slough contains a rich marsh
and littoral zone, providing feeding areas for a variety of shorebirds and
other estuarine wildlife.[28]

Typical of the San Francisco Bay Area, Palo Alto has a Mediterranean climate
with cool, wet winters and warm, dry summers. Typically, in the warmer months,
as the sun goes down, the fog bank flows over the foothills to the west and
covers the night sky, thus creating a blanket that helps trap the summer
warmth absorbed during the day. Even so, it is rare for the overnight low
temperature to exceed 60 °F (16 °C).

In January, average temperatures range from 38.5 °F (3.6 °C) to 57.4 °F (14.1
°C). In July, average temperatures range from 54.9 °F (12.7 °C) to 78.4 °F
(25.8 °C). The record high temperature was 107 °F (42 °C) on June 15, 1961,
and the record low temperature was 15 °F (−9 °C) on November 17, 2003.
Temperatures reach 90 °F (32 °C) or higher on an average of 9.9 days.
Temperatures drop to 32 °F (0 °C) or lower on an average of 16.1 days.

Due to the Santa Cruz Mountains to the west, there is a "rain shadow" in Palo
Alto, resulting in an average annual rainfall of only 15.32 inches (389 mm).
Measurable rainfall occurs on an average of 57 days annually. The wettest year
on record was 1983 with 32.51 inches (826 mm) and the driest year was 1976
with 7.34 inches (186 mm). The most rainfall in one month was 12.43 inches
(316 mm) in February 1998 and the most rainfall in one day was 3.75 inches (95
mm) on February 3, 1998. Measurable snowfall is very rare in downtown Palo
Alto, but 1.5 inches (38 mm) fell on January 21, 1962.[29] It is more common
in the higher but rural sections of the town.[30]

According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Palo Alto has a warm-
summer mediterranean climate (Csb)[31]

[33]

Palo Alto was incorporated in 1894. In 1909, a municipal charter created a
local government consisting of a fifteen-member City Council, with
responsibilities for various governmental functions delegated to appointed
committees. In 1950, the City adopted a Council–manager government. Several
appointed committees continue to advise the City Council on specialized
issues, such as land use planning, utilities, and libraries, but these
committees no longer have direct authority over City staff. Currently, the
City Council has only seven members.

The mayor and vice-mayor serve one year at a time, with terms ending in
January. General municipal elections are held in November of even-numbered
years. Council terms are four years long.[34]

According to one study in 2015, the city's effective property tax rate of
0.42% was the lowest of the California cities included in the study.[35]

In the California State Legislature, Palo Alto is in the 13th Senate District,
represented by Democrat Jerry Hill,[36] and in the 24th Assembly District,
represented by Democrat Marc Berman.[37][38]

In the United States House of Representatives, Palo Alto is in California's
18th congressional district, represented by Democrat Anna Eshoo.[39]

According to the California Secretary of State, as of February 10, 2019, Palo
Alto has 40,040 registered voters. Of those, 20,857 (52.1%) are registered
Democrats, 4,689 (11.7%) are registered Republicans, and 13,520 (33.8%) have
declined to state a political party.[40]

The 2010 United States Census reported that Palo Alto had a population of
64,403.[42] The population density was 2,497.5 people per square mile
(964.3/km2). The racial makeup of Palo Alto was 41,359 (64.2%) White, 17,461
(27.1%) Asian, 1,197 (1.9%) African American, 121 (0.2%) Native American, 142
(0.2%) Pacific Islander, 1,426 (2.2%) from other races, and 2,697 (4.2%) from
two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 3,974 persons (6.2%).

The Census reported that 63,820 people (99.1% of the population) lived in
households, 205 (0.3%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 378
(0.6%) were institutionalized.

There were 26,493 households, out of which 8,624 (32.6%) had children under
the age of 18 living in them, 13,975 (52.7%) were opposite-sex married couples
living together, 1,843 (7.0%) had a female householder with no husband
present, 659 (2.5%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were
979 (3.7%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 188 (0.7%) same-sex
married couples or partnerships. 7,982 households (30.1%) were made up of
individuals and 3,285 (12.4%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age
or older. The average household size was 2.41. There were 16,477 families
(62.2% of all households); the average family size was 3.04.

The population was spread out with 15,079 people (23.4%) under the age of 18,
3,141 people (4.9%) aged 18 to 24, 17,159 people (26.6%) aged 25 to 44, 18,018
people (28.0%) aged 45 to 64, and 11,006 people (17.1%) who were 65 years of
age or older. The median age was 41.9 years. For every 100 females, there were
95.7 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.0 males.

There were 28,216 housing units at an average density of 1,094.2 per square
mile (422.5/km2), of which 14,766 (55.7%) were owner-occupied, and 11,727
(44.3%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.5%; the
rental vacancy rate was 5.6%. 39,176 people (60.8% of the population) lived in
owner-occupied housing units and 24,644 people (38.3%) lived in rental housing
units.

As of the census[44] of 2000, there were 58,598 people, 25,216 households, and
14,600 families residing in the city. The population density was 955.8/km2
(2,475.3/mi2). There were 26,048 housing units at an average density of
424.9/km2 (1,100.3/mi2). The racial makeup of the city was 75.76% White, 2.02%
Black, 0.21% Native American, 17.22% Asian, 0.14% Pacific Islander, 1.41% from
other races, and 3.24% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race
were 4.65% of the population.

There were 25,216 households, of which 27.2% had resident children under the
age of 18, 48.5% were married couples living together, 7.0% had a female
householder with no husband present, and 42.1% were non-families. 32.6% of all
households were made up of individuals and 10.8% had someone living alone who
was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.30 and the
average family size was 2.95.

In the city, the population was spread out with 21.2% under the age of 18,
4.9% from 18 to 24, 32.4% from 25 to 44, 25.9% from 45 to 64, and 15.6% who
were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 40 years. For every 100
females, there were 95.8 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there
were 93.6 males.

According to a 2007 estimate, the median income for a household in the city
was $119,046, and the median income for a family was $153,197.[45] Males had a
median income of $91,051 versus $60,202 for females. The per capita income for
the city was $56,257. About 3.2% of families and 4.8% of the population were
below the poverty line, including 4.0% of those under age 18 and 5.0% of those
age 65 or over.

Palo Alto, north of Oregon Expressway, is filled with older homes, including
Craftsman and California Colonials, some of which date back to the 1890s but
most of which were built in the first four decades of the 20th century. South
of Oregon Expressway, the homes, including many Joseph Eichler-designed or
Eichler-style houses, were primarily built in the first 20 years after World
War II.

While the city contains homes that now cost anywhere from $800,000 to well in
excess of $40 million, much of Palo Alto's housing stock is in the style of
California mid-century middle-class suburbia. It has highly rated public
schools (see: Gunn High School and Palo Alto High School), a high quality of
life, numerous parks and open space reserves, and a vibrant downtown area. The
median home sale price for all of Palo Alto was more than $1.2 million in
2007[46] and $1.4 million in July 2009.[47] Palo Alto ranked in as the 5th
most expensive city in the United States as of 2007[update], with an average
home sales price of $1,677,000.[48] In 2010, Palo Alto ranked as the 2nd most
expensive city in the United States, with a four-bedroom, two-bathroom home
listing for $1.48 million on average.[49] A primary driver of housing market
values in Palo Alto is the political climate that is restricting new
development in a city with a large jobs-to-housing imbalance and some of the
most attractive jobs in the country. In addition, Palo Alto schools test at
some of the highest levels in the Bay Area. Palo Alto is by some measures the
most expensive college town in the United States.[50] A majority of Stanford
students live on campus.[51]

Palo Alto serves as a central economic focal point of the Silicon Valley, and
is home to more than 7,000 businesses employing more than 98,000 people.[52]
Many prominent technology firms reside in the Stanford Research Park on Page
Mill Road, while nearby Sand Hill Road in the adjacent city of Menlo Park is a
notable hub of venture capitalists. The city's economy generally follows the
economic trends of the rest of the Silicon Valley. Well-known companies and
research facilities headquartered in Palo Alto include:[53]

Other notable companies with significant presences in Palo Alto include:

Many nearby Silicon Valley companies, no longer primarily in Palo Alto, were
once headquartered and experienced major growth in Palo Alto, including Google
(now in Mountain View),[60][61] Facebook (now in Menlo Park),[62] and PayPal
(now in San Jose).[60][63]

Palo Alto's retail and restaurant trade includes Stanford Shopping Center, an
upscale open air shopping center established in 1955, and downtown Palo Alto,
centered on University Avenue.[64]

Palo Alto is the location of the first street-level Apple Store,[65] the first
Apple mini store,[66] the first West Coast Whole Foods Market store,[67] and
the first Victoria's Secret.[68]

According to the City's 2018 Comprehensive Annual Financial Report,[69] the
top employers in the city are:

Palo Alto has a city run and owned utility, City of Palo Alto Utilities
(CPAU), which provides water, electric, gas service, and waste water disposal
within city limits,[70] with the minor exception of a rural portion of the
city in the hills west of Interstate 280, past the Country Club, which does
not receive gas from the City. Almost all other communities in northern
California depend on Pacific Gas and Electric Company (PG&E) for gas and
electricity.

Water and Gas Services (WGS) operates gas and water distribution networks
within the city limits. The city operates both gas meters and the distribution
pipelines. Water comes from city-operated watershed and wells and the City and
County of San Francisco Hetch Hetchy system. The city is located in Santa
Clara Valley Water District, North Zone. Hetch Hetchy pipeline #3 and #4 pass
through the city.

The city operates its own electric power distribution network and telemetry
cable network. Interconnection points tie the city into PG&E's electric
transmission system, which brings power from several sources to the city. A
claim to fame is the city's exemption from rolling blackouts during the summer
2000 power shortages. Palo Alto is a member of a joint powers authority (the
Northern California Power Agency), which cooperatively generates electricity
for government power providers such as the City of Santa Clara, the City of
Redding, and the Port of Oakland. Roughly the same group of entities operate
the Transmission Agency of Northern California (TANC). TANC transports power
over its own lines from as far as British Columbia through an interconnection
with the federal Bonneville Power Administration. A local oddity is a series
of joint poles; those primary conductor cross arms are marked PGE and CPA
(City of Palo Alto) to identify each utility's side of the shared cross arms.

Palo Alto has an ongoing community debate about the city providing fiber optic
connectivity to all residences. A series of pilot programs have been proposed.
One proposal called for the city to install dark fiber, which would be made
live by a contractor.

Services traditionally attributed to a cable television provider were sold to
a regulated commercial concern. Previously the cable system was operated by a
cooperative called Palo Alto Cable Coop.

The former Regional Bell Operating Company in Palo Alto was Pacific Telephone,
now called AT&T Inc., and previously called SBC and Pacific Bell. One of the
earliest central office facilities switching Palo Alto calls is the historic
Davenport central office (CO) at 529 Bryant Street. The building was sold and
is now the home of the Palo Alto Internet Exchange. The former CO building is
marked by a bronze plaque and is located on the north side of Bryant Street
between University Avenue and Hamilton Avenue. It was called Davenport after
the exchange name at the introduction of dial telephone service in Palo Alto.
For example, modern numbers starting with 325- were Davenport 5 in the 1950s
and '60s. The Step-by-Step office was scrapped and replaced by stored-program-
controlled equipment at a different location about 1980. Stanford calls ran on
a Step-by-Step Western Electric 701 PBX until the university purchased its own
switch about 1980. It had the older, traditional Bell System 600 Hz+120 Hz
dial tone. The old 497-number PBX, MDF, and battery string were housed in a
steel building at 333 Bonair Siding. From the 1950s to 1980s, the bulk of Palo
Alto calls were switched on Number 5 Crossbar systems. By the mid-1980s, these
electromechanical systems had been junked. Under the Bell System's regulated
monopoly, local coin telephone calls were ten cents until the early 1980s.

During the drought of the early 1990s, Palo Alto employed water waste patrol
officers to enforce water saving regulations. The team, called "Gush Busters",
patrolled city streets looking for broken water pipes and poorly managed
irrigation systems. Regulations were set to stop restaurants from habitually
serving water, runoff from irrigation and irrigation during the day. The main
goal of the team was to educate the public in ways to save water. Citations
consisted of Friendly Reminder postcards and more formal notices. To help
promote the conservation message, the team only used bicycles and mopeds.

The city was among the first in Santa Clara County to offer advanced life
support (ALS) paramedic-level (EMT-P) ambulance service. In an arrangement
predating countywide paramedic service, Palo Alto Fire operates two paramedic
ambulances which are theoretically shared with county EMS assets. The Palo
Alto Fire Department is currently the only fire department in Santa Clara
County that routinely transports patients. Rural Metro holds the Santa Clara
County 911 contract and provides transportation in other cities. Enhanced
9-1-1 arrived in about 1980 and included the then-new ability to report
emergencies from coin telephones without using a coin. Palo Alto Fire also has
a contract with Stanford University to cover most of the campus.[71] In all,
the Fire Department has six regular stations plus one opened only during the
summer fire season in the foothills.[72]

The police station was originally housed in a stone building at 450 Bryant
Street.[73] Still engraved with the words _Police Court_ , the building is now
a non-profit senior citizen center, Avenidas.[74] The police are now
headquartered in the City Hall high rise. The department has just under 100
sworn officers ranking supplemented by approximately ten reserve officers and
professional staff who support the police department and the animal services
organization.

Palo Alto is home to Palo Alto University, a school focused on psychology.

The Palo Alto Unified School District provides public education for most of
Palo Alto. According to the National Center for Education Statistics, Palo
Alto has a student-teacher ratio of 14.9,[75] much lower than some surrounding
communities. Juana Briones Elementary has a student/teacher ratio of 14.4.[76]
The school board meets at 7 p.m. on the 2nd and 4th Tuesdays of the month; the
meetings are open to the public and city, cast live on Channel 28. Channel 28
is operated by the Mid-peninsula Community Media Center[77] in Palo Alto,
which is affiliated with the Alliance for Community Media.[78] ACM represents
over 2000 PEG channels in the US. Government-access television (GATV) Cable
TV. Palo Alto students attend one of two high schools, Gunn High School or
Palo Alto High School. There are also 3 middle schools, J.L.S., Jordan, and
Terman.

The Los Altos School District and Mountain View-Los Altos Union High School
District provide public education for the Monroe neighborhood portion of Palo
Alto off El Camino Real south of Adobe Creek.

The Palo Alto City Library has five branches, with a total of 265,000 items in
their collections.[91] The library's mission is to enable people to explore
library resources to enrich their lives with knowledge, information, and
enjoyment. For Palo Alto library card holders, the main library web page also
offers links to primary source databases with collections of magazine,
newspaper, and other print articles. The Palo Alto City Library is also a
member of the Northern California Digital Library, which allows card holders
to browse and download the digital resources made available. Library cards are
freely available for California residents.[92] The Mitchell Park Library, the
largest one in Palo Alto, was under construction beginning in 2010, but
reopened in December 2014.[93][94]

The _Palo Alto Daily Post_ publishes six days a week. _Palo Alto Daily News_ ,
a unit of the San Jose Mercury News, publishes 5 days a week. _Palo Alto
Weekly_ is published Fridays. _Palo Alto Times_ , a daily newspaper served
Palo Alto and neighboring cities beginning in 1894. In 1979 it became the
_Peninsula Times Tribune_. The newspaper ceased publication in 1993.[95]

KDOW 1220 AM began broadcasting in 1949 as KIBE; it later became KDFC,
simulcasting classical KDFC-FM. As KDOW it broadcasts a business news format.
The transmitter is in East Palo Alto near the western approach to Dumbarton
Bridge with power of 5,000 watts daytime and 145 watts nighttime.

The Midpeninsula Community Media Center provides public, educational, and
government access (PEG) cable tv channels 26, 28, 29, 30 and 75.[96]

Among other programs, Palo Alto Institute runs a unique film festival, the
Palo Alto International Film Festival, that focuses on the ways in which new
technologies influence and are influenced by artistic revolution in media.

The movie _Palo Alto_ (2007) was filmed in the town and many landmarks can be
seen in the background but the plot could be centered in any smaller town or
city.

Palo Alto is served by two major freeways, Highway 101 and Interstate 280, and
is traversed by the Peninsula's main north-south boulevard, El Camino Real (SR
82). The city is also served indirectly by State Route 84 which traverses the
Dumbarton Bridge to the north.

There are no parking meters in Palo Alto, and all municipal parking lots and
multi-level parking structures are free but limited to two or three hours per
weekday 8am–5pm.[97] Downtown Palo Alto has recently added many new lots to
fill the overflow of vehicles.[98]

Palo Alto is served by Palo Alto Airport of Santa Clara County (KPAO), one of
the busiest single-runway general aviation airports in the country. It is used
by many daily commuters who fly (usually in private single-engine aircraft)
from their homes in the Central Valley to work in the Palo Alto area. The
nearest commercial airport is San Jose International Airport (SJC), about 15
miles (24 km) southeast. Nearby is San Francisco International Airport (SFO),
about 21 miles (34 km) north.

Train service is available via Caltrain with service between San Francisco and
San Jose, extending to Gilroy. Caltrain has two regular stations in Palo Alto,
the main one at the Palo Alto Station in downtown Palo Alto (local, limited,
and express). The main Palo Alto station is the second busiest (behind 4th and
King in San Francisco) on the entire Caltrain line. The other station is
located at California Avenue, (local and limited).[99] A third, the Stanford
station, located beside Alma Street at Embarcadero Road, is used for
occasional sports events (generally football) at Stanford Stadium.

The Palo Alto Transit Center adjacent to the Palo Alto Train Station is the
major bus hub for northern Santa Clara county. The Santa Clara Valley
Transportation Authority (VTA) provides primary bus service through Palo Alto
with service to the south bay and Silicon Valley. San Mateo County Transit
District (SamTrans) provides service to San Mateo County to the north but some
lines include the Palo Alto Transit Center. The Stanford University Free
Shuttle (Marguerite) provides a supplementary bus service between Stanford
University and the Palo Alto Transit Center, and the Palo Alto Free Shuttle
(Crosstown and Embarcadero), which circulates frequently, and provides service
to major points in Palo Alto, including the main library, downtown, the
Municipal Golf Course, the Palo Alto Transit Center, and both high
schools.[100]

Cycling is a popular mode of transportation in Palo Alto. 9.5% of residents
bicycle to work,[101] the highest percentage of any city in the Bay Area, and
third-highest in the United States, after Davis, California and Boulder,
Colorado. Since 2003, Palo Alto has received a Bicycle Friendly Community
status of "Gold" from the League of American Bicyclists. It is also the
birthplace and home of Bike Arc.

The city's flat terrain and many quiet tree-shaded residential streets offer
comfort and safety to cyclists, and the temperate climate makes year-round
cycling convenient. Palo Alto pioneered the bicycle boulevard concept in the
early 1980s, enhancing residential Bryant Street to prioritize it for cyclists
by removing stop signs, providing special traffic signals, and installing
traffic diverters, and a bicycle/pedestrian bridge over Matadero Creek.
However, busy arterial streets which often offer the fastest and most direct
route to many destinations, are dangerous for cyclists due to high volumes of
fast-moving traffic and the lack of bicycle lanes. El Camino Real, Alma
Street, and Embarcadero and Middlefield roads, all identified as "high
priorities" for adding bicycle lanes to improve safety by the 2003 Palo Alto
Bicycle Transportation Plan, still contain no provisions for cyclists.

The Palo Alto Police Department decided to stop using tasers to detain
bicyclists after a 2012 incident in which a 16-year-old boy, who had bicycled
through a stop sign, was injured after police officers pursued him, fired a
taser at him and suddenly braked their patrol car in front of him, causing the
boy to crash.[102]

Conditions for walking are excellent in Palo Alto except for crossing high-
volume arterial streets such as El Camino Real and Oregon Expressway.
Sidewalks are available on nearly every city street, with the notable
exception of the Barron Park neighborhood, which was the last to be
incorporated into the city. Palo Alto's street grid is well-connected with few
dead-end streets, especially in the city's older northern neighborhoods. An
extensive urban forest, which is protected by the city's municipal code,
provides shade and visual diversity, and slows motor vehicle traffic. 4.8% of
residents walk to work.[101]

Palo Alto has seven sister cities, as designated by Sister Cities
International:

In 1989, Palo Alto received a gift of a large, whimsical wooden sculpture
called _Foreign Friends_ ( _Fjärran Vänner_ )—of a man, woman, dog and bird
sitting on a park bench—from Linköping. The sculpture was praised by some,
called "grotesque" by others, and became a lightning rod for vandals. It was
covered with a large addressed postcard marked "Return to Sender." A former
Stanford University professor was arrested for attempting to light it on fire.
It was also doused with paint.[105] When the original heads were decapitated
on Halloween, 1993, the statue became a shrine—flowers bouquets and cards were
placed upon it. Following an anonymous donation, the heads were restored.
Within weeks, the restored heads were decapitated again, this time
disappearing. The heads were eventually replaced with new ones, which
generated even more distaste, as many deemed the new heads even less
attractive.[105]

A few months later, the man's arm was chopped off, the woman's lap was
vandalized, the bird was stolen, and the replacements heads were decapitated
and stolen.[105] The sculpture was removed from its location on Embarcadero
Road and Waverley Avenue in 1995, dismantled, and placed in storage until it
was destroyed in 2000. Ironically, the statue was designed not as a lasting
work of art, but as something to be climbed on with a lifespan of 10 to 25
years.[106]

Palo Alto was the first city in California to participate in a class action
lawsuit against major battery producers, and currently serves as a
representative for various cities and public entities across the state. The
lawsuit was filed against global manufacturers of lithium-ion batteries,
including Panasonic, LG Chem, Sony, Hitachi and Sanyo.

The companies were accused of unfair business practices. They were alleged to
have fixed prices of rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, which are commonly
used in laptops, smartphones and GPS devices, and Palo Alto has purchased a
lot[ _citation needed_ ] of such devices.

Palo Alto's case will be consolidated with many others brought against the
batteries producers in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of
California. The companies are also facing at least 10 lawsuits in New Jersey.
The city is represented by Rene Sloan Holtzman & Sakai, LLP, and Green &
Noblin, P.C.[111]

