**Parlophone Records Limited** (also known as **Parlophone Records** and
**Parlophone** ) is a German-British record label founded in Germany in 1896
by the Carl Lindström Company as **Parlophon**. The British branch of the
label was founded on 8 August 1923 as **The Parlophone Company Limited (The
Parlophone Co. Ltd.)** , which developed a reputation in the 1920s as a jazz
record label. On 5 October 1926, the Columbia Graphophone Company acquired
Parlophone's business, name, logo, and release library, and merged with the
Gramophone Company on 31 March 1931 to become Electric & Musical Industries
Limited (EMI). George Martin joined Parlophone in 1950 as assistant label
manager, taking over as manager in 1955. Martin produced and released a mix of
product, including recordings by comedian Peter Sellers, pianist Mrs Mills,
and teen idol Adam Faith.

In 1962, Martin signed the Beatles, at the time a struggling band from
Liverpool. During the 1960s, when Cilla Black, Billy J. Kramer, the Fourmost,
and the Hollies also signed, Parlophone became one of the world's most famous
labels. For several years, Parlophone claimed the best-selling UK single, "She
Loves You", and the best-selling UK album, _Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club
Band_ , both by the Beatles. The label placed seven singles at No. 1 during
1964, when it claimed top spot on the UK Albums Chart for 40 weeks. Parlophone
continued as a division of EMI until it was merged into the Gramophone Co. on
1 July 1965. On 1 July 1973, the Gramophone Co. was renamed EMI Records
Limited.

On 28 September 2012, regulators approved Universal Music Group (UMG)'s
planned acquisition of EMI on condition that its EMI Records group would be
divested from the combined group. EMI Records Ltd. included Parlophone and
other labels to be divested and were for a short time operated in a single
entity known as the Parlophone Label Group (PLG), while UMG pended their sale.
Warner Music Group (WMG) acquired Parlophone and PLG in 7 February 2013,
making Parlophone their third flagship label alongside Warner and Atlantic.
PLG was renamed Parlophone Records Limited in May 2013. Parlophone is the
oldest of WMG's "flagship" record labels.

Parlophone was founded "Parlophon" by Carl Lindström Company in 1896.[1] The
name Parlophon was used for gramophones before the company began making
records of their own. The label's _₤_ trademark is a German _L_ that stands
for Lindström. (It coincidentally resembles the British pound sign _£_ , which
itself is derived from the letter _L_ for the Ancient Roman unit of
measurement _libra_ , which means _pound_ in Latin.) On 8 August 1923, the
British branch of "Parlophone" (with the "e" added) was established, led by
A&R manager Oscar Preuss.[1] In its early years, Parlophone established itself
as a leading jazz label in Britain.[2]

In 1927, the Columbia Graphophone Company acquired a controlling interest in
the Carl Lindström Company, including Parlophone.[1] Parlophone became a
subsidiary of Electric & Musical Industries (EMI), after Columbia Graphophone
merged with the Gramophone Company in 1931.[3]

In 1950, Oscar Preuss hired producer George Martin as his assistant. When
Preuss retired in 1955, Martin succeeded him as Parlophone's manager.
Parlophone specialized in mainly classical music, cast recordings, and
regional British music.[4] Musicians signed to the label included Humphrey
Lyttelton and the Vipers Skiffle Group.[5]

One of the label's consistently successful acts was teen idol Adam Faith, who
was signed to the label in 1959.[6] The label gained significant popularity in
1962 when Martin signed Liverpool band the Beatles.[3] Parlophone gained more
attention after signing the Hollies, Ella Fitzgerald, and Gerry and the
Pacemakers in the 1960s.[7] Martin left to form Associated Independent
Recording (AIR) Studios in 1965.[8]

Parlophone became dormant in 1973 when most of the heritage labels were phased
out in favor of EMI Records.[9] Parlophone was revived in 1980.[10] During the
next decades the label signed Pet Shop Boys, Duran Duran, Roxette, Radiohead,
Supergrass, Guy Berryman, the Chemical Brothers, Blur, Coldplay, Kylie
Minogue, Damon Albarn, Conor Maynard, Gabrielle Aplin, and Gorillaz.[11][
_citation needed_ ]

On 23 April 2008, Miles Leonard was confirmed as the label's president.[12]

On 28 September 2012, regulators approved Universal Music Group's planned
acquisition of Parlophone's parent group EMI for £1.2 billion, subject to
conditions imposed by the European Commission requiring that UMG sell off a
number of labels, including Parlophone itself (aside from the Beatles'
catalogue, which was kept by UMG and moved to Universal's newly formed
Calderstone Productions), Chrysalis, Ensign, Virgin Classics, EMI Classics,
and EMI's operations in Portugal, Spain, France, Belgium, Denmark, Norway,
Sweden, Czech Republic, Slovakia, and Poland.[13] These labels and catalogues
were operated independently from Universal as Parlophone Label Group to
prepare for a transaction early in 2013. UMG received several offers for PLG,
including those from Island founder Chris Blackwell, Simon Fuller, a Sony/BMG
consortium, Warner Music Group, and MacAndrews & Forbes.[14][15][16]

On 7 February 2013, it was confirmed that Warner Music Group would acquire
Parlophone Label Group for US$765 million. The deal was approved in May 2013
by the European Union, which saw no concerns about the deal because of WMG's
smaller reach compared to the merged UMG and Sony. Warner Music closed the
deal on July 1. Parlophone Label Group was the old EMI Records label that
included both the Parlophone and the eponymous EMI labels. The EMI trademark
was retained by Universal (as Virgin EMI Records) while the "old" EMI Records
became defunct and was renamed "Parlophone Records Ltd.".

Soon after acquiring Parlophone, WMG signed an agreement with IMPALA and the
Merlin Network (two groups which opposed the EMI/Universal deal) to divest
$200 million worth of artists to independent labels in order to help offset
the consolidation triggered by the merger.[17][18] In April 2016, the back
catalogue of British rock band Radiohead, who had sued Parlophone and EMI over
a dispute in music royalties, was transferred to XL Recordings.[19]

WMG treats Parlophone as its third "frontline" label group alongside Atlantic
and Warner.[20] In the US, most of Parlophone's artists are now distributed
under Warner Records. The only exceptions concern Coldplay and Tinie Tempah,
both distributed under Atlantic Records, and David Guetta, distributed under
Atlantic's electronic music imprint Big Beat Records.[21]

Parlophone released The Beatles' albums up to _Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts
Club Band_. Subsequent releases – _The White Album_ , _Yellow Submarine_ ,
_Abbey Road_ and _Let It Be_ – were issued on the Beatles' Apple record label,
distributed by EMI, and bearing Parlophone catalogue numbers.

The Beatles deal is one of the cheapest made by Parlophone.[22]

Despite the separation of Parlophone from EMI as a condition of EMI's
acquisition by UMG, Universal was allowed to keep the Beatles' recorded music
catalogue, which was assigned to the subsidiary Calderstone Productions.[23]

Parlophone's roster includes Lily Allen, Coldplay, David Guetta, Gorillaz,
Conor Maynard, Aya Nakamura, Soprano, Synapson, Two Door Cinema Club, and Paul
Weller. Its contemporary HMV was more of a classical music label and ceased
issuing popular music recordings in 1967; later known as EMI Classics, it was
absorbed into Warner Classics in 2013; English Columbia was replaced by the
EMI pop label. Parlophone also operates Regal, a contemporary revival of the
historic Columbia Graphophone budget/reissue label founded in 1914. Because
Parlophone Records Ltd. absorbed the catalogues of EMI Records UK, the
Columbia Graphophone Company, His Master's Voice, the archives of non-U.S.
former artists of Harvest, and some European divisions of EMI Music (with new
reissues bearing the Parlophone label), only artists whose recordings were
originally issued by Parlophone are listed here, either during its time as a
subsidiary of EMI (1931–2012) or as a Warner Music sub-label (2013–present).

Artists whose recordings are controlled by Parlophone and Warner Music but
were distributed by other labels:

Vertinsky Parlophone B.23017, made in Germany

Early 20th century Parlophone record label of the 78rpm acoustic era

_Please Please Me_ by the Beatles (side 1) – 1963. Parlophone _gold and black_
label

_With the Beatles_ (side 1) – Parlophone _yellow and black_ label

West End Blues, British Parlophone record

The labels shown here include those used for 78s and LPs. The label design for
7" singles had the same standard template as several other EMI labels, with
the large "45" insignia to the right. In recent years, design uniformity has
relaxed from release to release.

