**Paul Hogan** , AM (born 8 October 1939)[4] is an Australian comedian, actor
and television presenter. He was nominated for the Academy Award for Best
Original Screenplay and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor â€“ Motion
Picture Musical or Comedy for his performance as outback adventurer Michael
"Crocodile" Dundee in _Crocodile Dundee_ (1986), the first in the _Crocodile
Dundee_ film series.

Paul Hogan was born in Lightning Ridge, New South Wales, Australia. He moved
to Granville in Western Sydney at a young age and worked as a rigger on the
Sydney Harbour Bridge.[5][6][7]

Hogan's first public appearance was on Australian television, the Nine
Network's amateur talent program _New Faces_ in 1971.[8] Hogan had observed to
his Harbour Bridge workmates that the program's entertainment value relied
significantly on the judges ridiculing and belittling the performers, and
suggested the judges deserved similar treatment. Hogan inveigled his way onto
the program by claiming to be a "tap-dancing knife-thrower". Hogan appeared on
stage in his work boots, holding elaborate prop 'knives' and proceeded to make
a series of jokes at the judges' expense; he finished by performing a
rudimentary shuffle and throwing the knives onto the floor. Strong positive
response from the viewing public saw Hogan invited back for repeated
performances on _New Faces_ ; in another of these, he proposed to "play the
shovels", which consisted of making a series of jokes before banging two
shovels together a few times. Hogan's natural ability as a comedic performer
attracted the attention of Mike Willesee, host of Nine's news magazine program
_A Current Affair._ Willesee offered Hogan regular appearances on the show,
during which Hogan would make humorous comment on some issue of the day.
During this time Hogan befriended _Current Affair_ producer John Cornell, who
became Hogan's manager and business partner.

Hogan followed this with his own comedy sketch program _The Paul Hogan Show_ ,
which he produced and wrote, and in which he played characters with Cornell
and Delvene Delaney. The series, which ran for 60 episodes between 1973 and
1984, was popular in his native country, the U.K where it aired on the new
Channel Four from 1982 and South Africa, and showcased his trademark
lighthearted but laddish ocker humour. Hogan won the 1973 TV Week Logie Award
for 'Best New Talent'.[9] The early series was on Channel Seven and by 1975,
it was screened on Channel Nine where it remained until the end of 1984.

In the 1970s, he advertised Winfield cigarettes in television, print and
billboard advertisements in which he wore a formal dinner suit. These ads
always ended with the catchphrase "Anyhow, have a Winfield". During the early
1980s, Hogan filmed a series of television ads promoting the Australian
tourism industry, which aired in the United States. An advertisement with the
phrase "shrimp on the barbie" which aired from 1984, was particularly
successful.[10]

In 1985, Hogan starred as an Australian World War I 'digger' named Pat Cleary
in the critically acclaimed mini-series _Anzacs_ which aired on the Nine
Network. Cleary was described as the quintessential Aussie larrikin and series
writer John Dixon wrote the part of Cleary with Hogan in mind. The series
included a "who's who" of Australian television and film actors of the day
including Jon Blake, Andrew Clarke, Megan Williams, Tony Bonner, Bill Kerr,
Ilona Rodgers, Vivean Gray and Robert Coleby.

Throughout the decade, he appeared on British TV in advertisements for
Foster's Lager, in which he played an earthy Australian abroad in London. The
character's most notable line (spoken incredulously at a ballet performance)
"Struth, there's a bloke down there with no strides on!", followed Hogan for
years, and the popularity of its "fish out of water" humour was repeated with
his next endeavour. In another advertisement from the same Foster's series,
Hogan's character is approached in a London Tube station by a Japanese tourist
who asks, 'Do you know the way to Cockfosters?' (referring to an area in North
London), to which Hogan replies (with a puzzled look on his face): "Drink it
warm, mate."

Hogan's breakout role was that of Mick "Crocodile" Dundee in the 1986 film
_Crocodile Dundee_. Hogan also co-wrote the movie, which was a massive
critical and commercial success in many countries. He won the 1987 Golden
Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and was also
nominated for Best Actor at the BAFTAs. The screenplay was nominated for an
Academy Award, a BAFTA and a Saturn Award. Along with Chevy Chase and Goldie
Hawn, Hogan co-hosted the 59th Academy Awards, also in 1987. Hogan again
portrayed Mick Dundee in the sequel _Crocodile Dundee II_ , released in 1988.
Hogan was also executive producer and co-writer with his son, Brett. Although
less popular than the first _Crocodile Dundee_ film with critics, it was also
a commercial success. The character made him popular in the United States,
with phrases like, "That's not a knife... _that's_ a knife!" entering the
lexicon, though Hogan was troubled that the character was perceived as a cross
between Chuck Norris and John Rambo, and turned down roles similar to those
due to their violent nature, commenting:

In the early 1990s, a Paramount executive pitched a concept of a _Crocodile
Dundee_ / _Beverly Hills Cop_ crossover movie.[12] Hogan refused the starring
role in the hit film _Ghost_ , choosing instead to make _Almost an Angel_
(1990).[13] In 1994 Hogan co-produced, wrote and starred in the Western comedy
film _Lightning Jack_. In 1996 Hogan starred in a remake of the 1963 film
_Flipper_ , a family-friendly movie about a dolphin. In 1998 he co-starred in
the made-for-TV drama _Floating Away_ , an adaptation of the Tim Sandlin book
_Sorrow Floats_. Hogan played 'Shane', a recovering alcoholic.[14]

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, he was featured in advertisements for the
Subaru Outback. In 2001, Hogan returned to the role that made him famous with
_Crocodile Dundee in Los Angeles_.

In 2004, Hogan starred in the Australian-produced comedy film _Strange
Bedfellows_, about two firemen pretending to be in a homosexual relationship
for financial benefit. _Strange Bedfellows_ was written and directed by
Hogan's friend Dean Murphy and was the highest-grossing Australian-made film
of 2004. 2005 saw the release of _Paul Hogan - Stand Up Hoges_ , a DVD
compilation of Hogan's favourite live performances throughout his career. In
2009, Hogan starred in another of Murphy's films, _Charlie& Boots_, a road-
movie concerning the relationship between a father (Hogan) and son (Shane
Jacobson). It was the second-highest grossing Australian-made film of 2009,
after _Mao's Last Dancer_.[15][16]

In 2013, 2014 and 2015 Hogan embarked on live stand-up performances throughout
Australia.[17] The 2013 _An Evening with Hoges_ tour featured capital cities
only but the 2014 tour _Hoges: One Night Only_ featured 25 locations including
regional Australia. 2015's _Hoges: Live_ saw shows in Hobart, Melbourne and
Sydney only. Some of this material was shown in the 2014 documentary _Hanging
with Hoges_ , in which Hogan was interviewed about his life and career by
Shane Jacobson.

In 2016 Hogan received the Longford Lyell Award for an outstanding
contribution to the Australian screen. Hogan joked he'd only ever been a "one-
hit wonder".[18]

In 1985, Hogan was named Australian of the Year.[19][20]

In 1986 he was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia (AM) "for service
to tourism and entertainment".[21]

in 1987 Hogan won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Musical or Comedy for
_Crocodile Dundee_.

In 2016 Hogan received the Longford Lyell Award, the highest honour of the
Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts (AACTA), for outstanding
services to the Australian screen.

Hogan and his first wife, Noelene Edwards, married in 1958. They separated and
divorced in 1981 and remarried less than one year later. A second divorce,
initiated in 1986, was considered one of Australia's ugliest celebrity
divorces.[22] Hogan married his _Crocodile Dundee_ co-star Linda Kozlowski in
1990. He has five children with his first wife and one with his second wife.
In October 2013, Kozlowski filed for divorce from Hogan, citing irreconcilable
differences.

In 2007 Hogan was named as one of a group in connection to an A$300 million
Australian tax fraud investigation called Operation Wickenby, investigating 23
companies for allegedly using overseas companies to hide income.[23] In July
2008, Hogan commented to Network Ten that he had "paid plenty of tax" in
Australia and that he had nothing to fear from the Australian Taxation Office
investigation.[24]

In October 2008, Hogan scored a major victory in his tax fight with the
Australian Crime Commission, who were forced to pay up to an estimated A$5
million for legal bills dating back to 2006 and were required to return seized
personal financial documents that they had admitted were irrelevant.[25] Hogan
has not been charged in connection with the investigation, which began in
2003.[25]

On 18 June 2010 in the Australian High Court, Hogan lost a long-running legal
battle to keep the contents of his tax documents secret, paving the way for
details of his offshore accounts to be published. Earlier the same year,
Australian media reported that the Australian Crime Commission was in the
final stages of preparing to lay criminal charges of tax evasion against
Hogan, film producer John Cornell and their accountant Anthony Stewart, who it
suspected channeled millions of dollars from the proceeds of the film
_Crocodile Dundee_ and other films into offshore tax havens. The release of
the documents is expected to help finalize the Tax Office's case.[26]

On 20 August 2010, Hogan flew to Sydney for his mother's funeral. Upon arrival
he was issued a Departure Prohibition Order by the Australian Taxation Office,
which prevented him leaving the country until his alleged tax debt was paid or
settled. The nation's tax office claims he owes taxes on A$37.5 million of
undeclared income.[27] On 3 September, Hogan was granted permission to return
to the US through an agreement between his lawyers and Australian tax
officials, though the terms of the agreement have not been disclosed. Hogan
continues to deny any wrongdoing in the case.[28]

In November 2010, the Australian Tax Office dropped its criminal investigation
of him and his business manager for tax evasion.[29]

In January 2011, it was announced that Hogan was suing the Australian
government, his lawyer stating that Hogan's "earning potential and reputation
has been decimated."[30] Hogan has since likened the Australian Tax Office to
the Taliban[31] and referred to staff as 'a-holes'.[32]

In May 2012, it was announced that, following mediation before an ex-High
Court judge, the entities settled with the Commissioner of Taxation in an
agreement "without admission". The parties have agreed that the terms of the
settlement are to be confidential, but as part of the settlement, the
Departure Prohibition Order has been revoked by the Commissioner.[33][34][35]
As of April 2013, Hogan's financial advisor Stewart remained in a dispute with
the Australian Tax Office.[36]

Hogan then reappeared in the media in April 2013 due to an AU$32.3 million
issue with a Swiss bank run by the Geneva firm Strachans. Following the
placement of the monetary sum in an offshore account for the purpose of tax
avoidance, Hogan is unable to access the funds as of April 2013 and a United
States court action that sought AU$80 million in damages proved unsuccessful
for Hogan.[37] Hogan publicly stated that he believes that Philip Egglishaw,
the principal of Strachans and a former tax advisor to Hogan, has absconded
with the money and Hogan's American legal representative Schuyler "Sky" Moore
filed corresponding documents in a Californian Court based on this claim.[36]
On 18 April 2013, it was reported that Egglishaw denied the allegations of his
former client.[38]

In May 2017, Chris Jordan, Commissioner of Taxation, implied that in spite of
Hogan's claim of victory over the Australian Taxation Office in 2012, Hogan
paid "tens of millions of dollars" to settle the matter.[39] In response Hogan
denied paying the ATO, and criticized Jordan for breaking the confidentiality
clause of the 2012 agreement.[40]

