**Pearl Mae Bailey** (March 29, 1918 – August 17, 1990) was an American
actress and singer. After appearing in vaudeville she made her Broadway debut
in _St. Louis Woman_ in 1946.[1] She won a Tony Award for the title role in
the all-black production of _Hello, Dolly!_ in 1968. In 1986, she won a
Daytime Emmy award for her performance as a fairy godmother in the ABC
Afterschool Special, _Cindy Eller: A Modern Fairy Tale_.

Her rendition of "Takes Two to Tango" hit the top ten in 1952. She received
the Screen Actors Guild Life Achievement Award in 1976 and the Presidential
Medal of Freedom on October 17, 1988.

Bailey was born in Newport News in Virginia, to the Reverend Joseph James and
Ella Mae Ricks Bailey.[2] She was raised in the Bloodfields neighborhood of
Newport News, Virginia. She graduated from Booker T. Washington High School in
nearby Norfolk, Virginia, the first city in the region to offer higher
education for black students. Blues singer Ruth Brown from Portsmouth,
Virginia was one of her classmates.

She made her stage-singing debut when she was 15 years old. Her brother Bill
Bailey was beginning his own career as a tap dancer, and suggested she enter
an amateur contest at the Pearl Theatre in Philadelphia. Bailey won and was
offered $35 a week to perform there for two weeks. However, the theatre closed
during her engagement and she was not paid.[2] She later won a similar
competition at Harlem's famous Apollo Theater and decided to pursue a career
in entertainment.

Bailey began by singing and dancing in Philadelphia's black nightclubs in the
1930s, and soon started performing in other parts of the East Coast. In 1941,
during World War II, Bailey toured the country with the USO, performing for
American troops. After the tour, she settled in New York. Her solo successes
as a nightclub performer were followed by acts with such entertainers as Cab
Calloway and Duke Ellington. In 1946, Bailey made her Broadway debut in _St.
Louis Woman_. For her performance, she won a Donaldson Award as the best
Broadway newcomer. Bailey continued to tour and record albums in between her
stage and screen performances. Early in the television medium, Bailey guest
starred on CBS's _Faye Emerson's Wonderful Town_. She hosted her own variety
series on ABC, _The Pearl Bailey Show_ (January–May 1971).

Her support of female impersonator Lynne Carter led him to credit Bailey with
launching his career.[3]

In 1967, Bailey and Cab Calloway headlined an all-black cast version of
_Hello, Dolly!_ The touring version was so successful, producer David Merrick
took it to Broadway where it played to sold-out houses and revitalized the
long running musical. Bailey was given a special Tony Award for her role and
RCA Victor made a second original cast album. That is the only recording of
the score to have an overture which was written especially for that recording.

A passionate fan of the New York Mets, Bailey sang the national anthem at Shea
Stadium prior to game 5 of the 1969 World Series, and appears in the Series
highlight film showing her support for the team. She also sang the national
anthem prior to Game 1 of the 1981 World Series between the New York Yankees
and Los Angeles Dodgers at Yankee Stadium.

Following her 1971 television series, she provided voices for animations such
as _Tubby the Tuba_ (1976) and Disney's _The Fox and the Hound_ (1981). She
returned to Broadway in 1975, playing the lead in an all-black production of
_Hello, Dolly!_. In October 1975, she was invited by Betty Ford to sing for
the Egyptian President Anwar Sadat in a White House state dinner, as part of
Middle-Eastern peace initiative.[4]

She earned a degree in theology from Georgetown University in Washington,
D.C., in 1985 at age 67. Here she was a student of Wilfrid Desan.

Later in her career, Bailey was a fixture as a spokesperson in a series of
Duncan Hines commercials, singing "Bill Bailey (Won't You Come Home)". She
also appeared in commercials for Jell-O,[5] and Westinghouse.[6] She also did
some free -spirited commercials for Paramount Chicken.

In her later years Bailey wrote several books: _The Raw Pearl_ (1968),
_Talking to Myself_ (1971), _Pearl's Kitchen_ (1973), and _Hurry Up America
and Spit_ (1976). In 1975 she was appointed special ambassador to the United
Nations by President Gerald Ford. Her last book, _Between You and Me_ (1989),
details her experiences with higher education. On January 19, 1985, she
appeared on the nationally televised broadcast of the 50th Presidential
Inaugural Gala, the night before the second inauguration of Ronald Reagan. In
1988 Bailey received the Presidential Medal of Freedom from President Reagan.

On November 19, 1952, Bailey married the jazz drummer Louie Bellson in London.

They later adopted a son, Tony, in the mid-1950s. A daughter, Dee Dee J.
Bellson, was born April 20, 1960. Tony Bellson died in 2004. Dee Dee Bellson
died on July 4, 2009, at the age of 49, five months after her father, who died
on Valentine's Day 2009.

Bailey, a Republican, was appointed by President Richard Nixon as America's
"Ambassador of Love" in 1970. She attended several meetings of the United
Nations and later appeared in a campaign ad for President Gerald Ford in the
1976 election.[7]

She was awarded the Bronze Medallion in 1968, the highest award conferred upon
civilians by New York City.

Bailey was a very good friend of actress Joan Crawford.[8] In 1969, Crawford
and Bailey joined fellow friend Gypsy Rose Lee in accepting a USO Award. In
the same year, Bailey was recognized as USO "Woman of the Year".[9][10] Upon
the passing of Crawford in May 1977, Bailey spoke of Crawford as her sister
before singing a hymn at her funeral.[8][11] U.S. Ambassador and American
socialite Perle Mesta was another close friend of Bailey.[12] In the waning
days of Mesta's life, Bailey visited her frequently and sang hymns for
her.[13][14]

Pearl Bailey died at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia on
August 17, 1990. Following an autopsy, Dr. Emanuel Rubin, professor and
chairman of the Department of Pathology at Jefferson Medical College,
announced the cause of death as arteriosclerotic coronary artery disease with
significant narrowing of the coronary artery. Bailey is buried at Rolling
Green Memorial Park in West Chester, Pennsylvania.

The television show _American Dad!_ features Pearl Bailey High School.[15]

A dress owned by Bailey is at the National Museum of African American History
and Culture.[16]

**Film**

**Television**

**Theater**

