In game theory, a **Perfect Bayesian Equilibrium** (PBE) is an equilibrium
concept relevant for dynamic games with incomplete information (sequential
Bayesian games). A PBE is a refinement of both Bayesian Nash equilibrium (BNE)
and subgame perfect equilibrium (SPE). A PBE has two components - _strategies_
and _beliefs_ :

The strategies and beliefs should satisfy the following conditions:

A PBE is always an NE but may not be an SPE.

A signaling game is the simplest kind of a dynamic Bayesian game. There are
two players, one of them (the "receiver") has only one possible type, and the
other (the "sender") has several possible types. The sender plays first, then
the receiver.

To calculate a PBE in a signaling game, we consider two kinds of equilibria: a
_separating equilibrium_ and a _pooling equilibrium_. In a separating
equilibrium each sender-type plays a different action, so the sender's action
gives information to the receiver; in a pooling equilibrium, all sender-types
play the same action, so the sender's action gives no information to the
receiver.

Consider the following _game_ :[1]

To analyze PBE in this game, let's look first at the following potential
_separating equilibria_ :

We conclude that in this game, there is _no_ separating equilibrium.

Now, let's look at the following potential pooling equilibria:

To summarize:

In the following example, the set of PBEs is strictly smaller than the set of
SPEs and BNEs. It is a variant of the above gift-game, with the following
change to the receiver's utility:

Note that in this variant, accepting is a dominant strategy for the receiver.

Similarly to example 1, there is no separating equilibrium. Let's look at the
following potential pooling equilibria:

Note that option 3 is a Nash equilibrium! If we ignore beliefs, then rejecting
can be considered a best-response for the receiver, since it does not affect
their payoff (since there is no gift anyway). Moreover, option 3 is even a
SPE, since the only subgame here is the entire game! Such implausible
equilibria might arise also in games with complete information, but they may
be eliminated by applying subgame perfect Nash equilibrium. However, Bayesian
games often contain non-singleton information sets and since subgames must
contain complete information sets, sometimes there is only one subgame—the
entire game—and so every Nash equilibrium is trivially subgame perfect. Even
if a game does have more than one subgame, the inability of subgame perfection
to cut through information sets can result in implausible equilibria not being
eliminated.

To summarize: in this variant of the gift game, there are two SPEs: either the
sender always gives and the receiver always accepts, or the sender always does
not give and the receiver always rejects. From these, only the first one is a
PBE; the other is not a PBE since it cannot be supported by any belief-system.

For further examples, see signaling game#Examples. See also [2] for more
examples.

A multi-stage game is a sequence of simultaneous games played one after the
other. These games may be identical (as in repeated games) or different.

The following game[3]:section 6.2 is a simple representation of the free-rider
problem. There are two players, each of whom can either build a public good or
not build. Each player gains 1 if the public good is built and 0 if not; in
addition, if player  i {\displaystyle i}
![i](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/add78d8608ad86e54951b8c8bd6c8d8416533d20)
builds the public good, they have to pay a cost of  C i {\displaystyle C_{i}}
![C_{i}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/cc49dc02c0ec8c86b67e7d10518ac791eda0bf22).
The costs are _private information_ \- each player knows their own cost but
not the other's cost. It is only known that each cost is drawn independently
at random from some probability distribution. This makes this game a Bayesian
game.

In the one-stage game, each player builds if-and-only-if their cost is smaller
than their expected gain from building. The expected gain from building is
exactly 1 times the probability that the other player does NOT build. In
equilibrium, for every player  i {\displaystyle i}
![i](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/add78d8608ad86e54951b8c8bd6c8d8416533d20),
there is a threshold cost  C i ∗ {\displaystyle C_{i}^{*}} ![{\\displaystyle
C_{i}^{*}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/040caa905f445f493a96313b27a9a991d44717da),
such that the player contributes if-and-only-if their cost is less than  C i ∗
{\displaystyle C_{i}^{*}} ![{\\displaystyle
C_{i}^{*}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/040caa905f445f493a96313b27a9a991d44717da).
This threshold cost can be calculated based on the probability distribution of
the players' costs. For example, if the costs are distributed uniformly on  [
0 , 2 ] {\displaystyle [0,2]}
![\[0,2\]](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/120ef5837b0c64a40a2333f5aefd3c36fc458e91),
then there is a symmetric equilibrium in which the threshold cost of both
players is 2/3. This means that a player whose cost is between 2/3 and 1 will
not contribute, even though their cost is below the benefit, because of the
possibility that the other player will contribute.

Now, suppose that this game is repeated two times.[3]:section 8.2.3 The two
plays are independent, i.e., each day the players decide simultaneously
whether to build a public good in that day, get a payoff of 1 if the good is
built in that day, and pay their cost if they built in that day. The only
connection between the games is that, by playing in the first day, the players
may reveal some information about their costs, and this information might
affect the play in the second day.

We are looking for a symmetric PBE. Denote by  c ^ {\displaystyle {\hat {c}}}
![\\hat{c}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/8417e85ae7f4eaee7df31347ce488f85c8884b93)
the threshold cost of both players in day 1 (so in day 1, each player builds
if-and-only-if their cost is at most  c ^ {\displaystyle {\hat {c}}}
![\\hat{c}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/8417e85ae7f4eaee7df31347ce488f85c8884b93)).
To calculate  c ^ {\displaystyle {\hat {c}}}
![\\hat{c}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/8417e85ae7f4eaee7df31347ce488f85c8884b93),
we work backwards and analyze the players' actions in day 2. Their actions
depend on the history (= the two actions in day 1), and there are three
options:

It is possible to calculate the expected payoff of the "threshold player" (a
player with cost exactly  c ^ {\displaystyle {\hat {c}}}
![\\hat{c}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/8417e85ae7f4eaee7df31347ce488f85c8884b93))
in each of these situations. Since the threshold player should be indifferent
between contributing and not contributing, it is possible to calculate the
day-1 threshold cost  c ^ {\displaystyle {\hat {c}}}
![\\hat{c}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/8417e85ae7f4eaee7df31347ce488f85c8884b93).
It turns out that this threshold is _lower_ than  c ∗ {\displaystyle c^{*}}
![c^{*}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/e0e1c40aab3bd8af2d5fc091d658f8e0034a635f)
\- the threshold in the one-stage game. This means that, in a two-stage game,
the players are _less_ willing to build than in the one-stage game.
Intuitively, the reason is that, when a player does not contribute in the
first day, they make the other player believe their cost is high, and this
makes the other player more willing to contribute in the second day.

In an open-outcry English auction, the bidders can raise the current price in
small steps (e.g. in $1 each time). However, often there is jump bidding \-
some bidders raise the current price much more than the minimal increment. One
explanation to this is that it serves as a signal to the other bidders. There
is a PBE in which each bidder jumps if-and-only-if their value is above a
certain threshold. See Jump bidding#signaling.

