**Pleasanton** is a city in Alameda County, California, incorporated in 1894.
It is a suburb in the San Francisco Bay Area located about 25 miles (40 km)
east of Oakland, and 6 miles (9.7 km) west of Livermore. The population was
70,285 at the 2010 census. In 2005 and 2007, Pleasanton was ranked the
wealthiest middle-sized city in the United States by the Census Bureau.[9][10]
Pleasanton is home to the headquarters of Safeway, Workday, Ellie Mae, Roche
Molecular Diagnostics, Blackhawk Network Holdings, and Veeva Systems. Other
major employers include Kaiser Permanente, Oracle, Nordstrom and Macy's.[11]
Although Oakland is the Alameda County seat, a few county offices are located
in Pleasanton. The Alameda County Fairgrounds are located in Pleasanton, where
the county fair is held during the last week of June and the first week of
July. Pleasanton Ridge Regional Park is located on the west side of town.

Pleasanton was ranked number 4 in _USA Today_ 's list of "America's 50 best
cities to live in" in 2014,[12] number 63 in _Money_ 's list of "The Best
Places to Live" in 2010,[13] and was named one of "Americans' Top Hometown
Spots" in the United States in 2009 by _Forbes_.[14] Pleasanton was named the
third wealthiest city in terms of earnings in the United States by NerdWallet
in 2013[15] and 2016.[16]

Before the establishment of Pleasanton in the 1850s, an earlier settlement in
the location was called Alisal. It was located on the lands of the Rancho
Santa Rita[17] near the site of an Indian ranchera, around the Francisco
Solano Alviso Adobe, called _El Alisal_ (The Sycamores),[18] one of the
earliest houses built in the valley in 1844. It is still standing and serves
as the centerpiece of the Alviso Adobe Community Park. Alisal, nicknamed "The
Most Desperate Town in the West", was one of the settlements located along _La
Vereda del Monte_ that was a haunt and refuge of bandits and desperados in the
era following the beginning of the California Gold Rush. Main Street shootouts
were not uncommon.[ _citation needed_ ] Banditos such as Claudio Feliz and
Joaquin Murrieta would ambush prospectors on their way back from the gold rush
fields and then seek refuge in Alisal. In the 1860s Procopio, Narciso
Bojorques and others took refuge there.[ _citation needed_ ]

Pleasanton is located on the lands of the Rancho Valle de San José and Rancho
Santa Rita Mexican land grants. Its name came from John W. Kottinger, an
Alameda County justice of the peace, who named it after his friend, Union army
cavalry Major General Alfred Pleasonton. A typographical error by a recording
clerk in Washington D.C. apparently led to the current spelling.[19]

In 1917, Pleasanton became the backdrop for the film _Rebecca of Sunnybrook
Farm_ , starring Mary Pickford.[20] The town was once home to Phoebe Apperson
Hearst, who lived in a 50-room mansion on a 2,000 acres (8.1 km2) estate, now
the site of Castlewood Country Club.[21]

Pleasanton is located at 37°40′21″N 121°52′57″W﻿ / ﻿37.67250°N 121.88250°W﻿ /
37.67250; -121.88250 (37.672530, −121.882517)[22] and is adjacent to Hayward,
Livermore, and Dublin. According to the United States Census Bureau, the city
has a total area of 24.3 square miles (63 km2), of which 24.1 square miles (62
km2) is land and 0.2 square miles (0.52 km2) (0.63%) is water. On the east
side of town on Stanley Blvd. near the Livermore border is Shadow Cliffs
Regional Park, a lake that permits swimming, fishing, and boating. On the west
side is the Pleasanton Ridge with two parks, Pleasanton Ridge and Augustin
Bernal Park. Much of Pleasanton is drained by the Arroyo Valle and Arroyo
Mocho watercourses. Pleasanton lies along the route of the historic First
Transcontinental Railroad.

Pleasanton features a Mediterranean climate, with warm to hot, dry summers and
mild to cool, wet winters (Köppen climate classification Csa). The highest
recorded temperature was 115 °F (46 °C) in 1950. The lowest recorded
temperature was 17 °F (−8 °C) in 1990.[23]

Because of the preservation of Pleasanton's historic downtown area, many
examples of architectural styles dating back to the mid-19th century exist.
Buildings in Gothic Revival, Pioneer, Italianate, Commercial Italianate,
Colonial Revival, and Queen Anne styles can be found within walking distance
of each other.

One of the icons of downtown Pleasanton is the _Kolln Hardware_ building,
located at 600 Main Street. It is designed in the Commercial Italianate style,
but the prominent five-sided corner tower and a few other features are
indicative of the Colonial Revival style. The structure mixes in a little bit
of Queen Anne design in the tower and gable. This building was built in 1890
and has always housed a hardware store, first by the Lewis Brothers, then
Cruikshank and Kolln. The hardware store has been known as Kolln Hardware
since 1933. In 2004, the Kolln Hardware business shut its doors. Bud Cornett,
a Pleasanton developer, purchased the landmark and has invested in its
renovation and earthquake retrofit.[24] After more than 100 years of serving
the community as a hardware store, the space is now occupied by Comerica
Bank.[25]

_La Hacienda del Pozo de Verona_ (The House of the Wellhead of Verona),
located in southwest Pleasanton, was an area landmark until it was destroyed
in a fire in 1969. The house was built by architect A.C. Schweinfurth for
William Randolph Hearst in 1898.[26] Phoebe Apperson Hearst had the hacienda
remodeled and expanded by architect Julia Morgan for use as her primary
residence after her husband died. The estate was built upon a 453-acre (1.83
km2) rancheria obtained in 1886 by George Hearst, who intended to use the
location for a race horse farm.[27] Its name was inspired by the circular,
carved marble wellhead purchased by Phoebe and William in Verona, Italy and
installed in the middle of the courtyard. The hacienda was the only female-
owned estate to be mentioned in Porter Garnett's _Stately Homes of
California_. The architecture of the hacienda has been called California
Mission style by various sources. The original architect used the term
"provincial Spanish Renaissance",[28] while Garnett wrote it would be more
accurately called "Hispano-Moresque".[29] Moorish influence was found
throughout the estate, such as in the guardhouses which stood on either side
of the courtyard entrance.[30] The hacienda was topped by imported red Spanish
tiles and had undecorated walls of white stucco. After Phoebe's death in 1919,
William had the wellhead and other furniture and objects moved to Hearst
Castle at San Simeon and sold the estate.[30]

Pleasanton continues to maintain a small town flavor with regular events for
the community. Every Saturday morning a farmers' market sets up on Angela, off
Main Street. In 2009, Pleasanton appeared on _Newsmax_ magazine's list of the
"Top 25 Most Uniquely American Cities and Towns", which cited the popular
farmers' market among the reasons for the city's charm.[31] There are several
parades during the year, commemorating Christmas, Memorial Day, and Veterans
Day, as well as kicking off the beginning of the Alameda County Fair and
soccer season.

Beginning in the late 1990s, the Pleasanton Downtown Association organized the
popular _First Wednesday_ celebrations from May through September of each
year. On the first Wednesday of summer months, Main Street was blocked to
traffic and adopted a street fair atmosphere. Each First Wednesday celebration
was given a theme and planned with related activities. At this local event,
businesses and organizations from downtown and around the Tri-Valley set up
booths in the center of the street. A local band performed in the Inklings
coffee house parking lot, which was closed off for dancing. The parking lot
was also set up as a beergarden, with beer and wine available for
consumption.[32] In 2017, the Association announced it was discontinuing the
events, and was considering other types of events in future years.[33]

Another Pleasanton Downtown Association tradition is the _Friday Concerts in
the Park_ series. Every Friday from June until September the PDA schedules
different local bands to perform in the evenings at the Lions' Wayside Park
off of First Street. The events are free of charge and draw a crowd.[34]
Additional seating for 'Concerts in the Park' is available at Delucchi Park,
at the intersection of First Street and Neal Street.

The Alameda County Fairgrounds is a 270-acre (110 ha) facility located in
Pleasanton. It is home to the annual Alameda County Fair, held since 1912,[35]
as well as numerous trade shows and community events. Located on its grounds,
the Pleasanton Fairgrounds Racetrack was built in 1858, making it the oldest
1-mile (1.6 km) horse racing track in the United States. There is a 3,000 seat
amphitheater, as well as a nine-hole golf course located within the track's
infield.

The Alameda County Central Railroad Society has maintained a model train
exhibit at the fairgrounds since 1959.[36]

The Firehouse Arts Center, opened in 2010, is a center of culture and art for
Pleasanton. It features a 221-seat theater, the Harrington art gallery, and
classrooms for art and drama.

Pleasanton experienced a major economic boom starting in the early 1980s,
largely associated with the development of a number of business parks, the
largest of which is the Hacienda Business Park. These host a number of campus-
like clusters of low-rise and medium-rise office buildings. Pleasanton has
been successful in attracting a number of corporate headquarters, such as
those of Safeway, Blackhawk Network Holdings, Workday, Simpson Manufacturing,
The Cooper Companies, Shaklee, and Patelco Credit Union. Despite an increase
in office space vacancy rates in 2000–2004, economic development has remained
strong through the middle of the decade.

Pleasanton was also the headquarters of the former PeopleSoft, Inc. (which was
acquired by Oracle Corporation), Documentum (which was acquired by EMC
Corporation), Thoratec (now part of Abbott), E-Loan (which was acquired by
Popular), Spreckels Sugar Company (which was acquired by Imperial Holly), Ross
Stores (which moved to nearby Dublin in 2014), and the home loan operation of
Providian (which was acquired by Washington Mutual, itself later acquired by
JPMorgan Chase). Oracle occupies two buildings of the former PeopleSoft
campus, and is the fourth-largest employer in Pleasanton, behind Workday,
Safeway and Kaiser Permanente. In addition, Pleasanton is the site of a large
AT&T campus.

Other companies with major operations in Pleasanton include Hitachi High
Technologies America, Inc., Cisco Systems, QASource, Sage Software (Accpac,
etc.), CooperVision, Clorox, Fireside Bank (closed in 2012), Roche, BMC
Software, Applied Biosystems, EMC Corporation, Portrait Displays, Inc. and
Symantec.

In retail operations, Pleasanton has one major regional mall (Stoneridge
Shopping Center) and a number of other shopping centers. Besides the anchor
tenants Nordstrom, Macy's, Sears, and JC Penney at Stoneridge, notable large
stores elsewhere in the city include Home Depot, Wal-Mart, and Kohl's.

In addition to the business parks and retail centers, Pleasanton is known for
its lively downtown, which is home to a number of fine-dining, casual, and
ethnic restaurants, specialty retailers, and service businesses. A redesign of
Main Street in the 1990s emphasized pedestrian traffic and outdoor dining.

In 2005, the median household income in Pleasanton was $101,022, the highest
income for any city with a population between 65,000 and 249,999 people.[9]
Similarly, for 2007, the median household income rose to $113,345, also the
highest in the category.[10] According to City-Data.com, the median household
income had risen to $121,622 by 2013, compared to a statewide median of
$60,190.[37]

According to the Bay East Association of Realtors, the median price of a
detached single family home was $935,000 as of September 2015.[38] According
to Zillow.com, the median home value in Pleasanton was $1,075,700 as of
January 2018.[39]

According to the city, as of July 2019 the top fifteen employers in Pleasanton
are:[11]

*Headquartered in Pleasanton 

The 2010 United States Census[41] reported that Pleasanton had a population of
70,285. The population density was 2,896.5 people per square mile
(1,118.4/km²). The racial makeup of Pleasanton was 47,058 (67.0%) White, 1,190
(1.7%) African American, 226 (0.3%) Native American, 16,322 (23.2%) Asian, 134
(0.2%) Pacific Islander, 2,002 (2.8%) from other races, and 3,353 (4.8%) from
two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 7,264 persons (10.3%).

The Census reported that 69,829 people (99.4% of the population) lived in
households, 320 (0.5%) lived in non-institutionalized group quarters, and 136
(0.2%) were institutionalized.

There were 25,245 households, out of which 10,785 (42.7%) had children under
the age of 18 living in them, 16,206 (64.2%) were opposite-sex married couples
living together, 2,024 (8.0%) had a female householder with no husband
present, 948 (3.8%) had a male householder with no wife present. There were
887 (3.5%) unmarried opposite-sex partnerships, and 156 (0.6%) same-sex
married couples or partnerships. Of the households, 4,860 (19.3%) were made up
of individuals and 1,853 (7.3%) had someone living alone who was 65 years of
age or older. The average household size was 2.77. There were 19,178 families
(76.0% of all households); the average family size was 3.20.

The population was spread out with 19,024 people (27.1%) under the age of 18,
4,378 people (6.2%) aged 18 to 24, 17,257 people (24.6%) aged 25 to 44, 21,965
people (31.3%) aged 45 to 64, and 7,661 people (10.9%) who were 65 years of
age or older. The median age was 40.5 years. For every 100 females, there were
96.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 93.0 males.

There were 26,053 housing units at an average density of 1,073.7 per square
mile (414.5/km²), of which 25,245 were occupied, of which 17,891 (70.9%) were
owner-occupied, and 7,354 (29.1%) were occupied by renters. The homeowner
vacancy rate was 0.9%; the rental vacancy rate was 4.1%. 51,839 people (73.8%
of the population) lived in owner-occupied housing units and 17,990 people
(25.6%) lived in rental housing units.

Pleasanton operates under a council-manager form of municipal government. The
Council consists of four elected at-large representatives and one directly
elected mayor. The Councilors are each elected to a four-year term while the
Mayor serves a two-year term. Council and mayoral elections are non-partisan.
The Vice Mayor is appointed each year by the City Council.

The City Council consists of: Jerry Thorne (Mayor), Karla Brown, Kathy Narum,
Jerry Pentin and Julie Testa.[2] The City Manager is Nelson Fialho.[43]

In the state legislature Pleasanton is in the 7th Senate District, represented
by Democrat Steve Glazer,[3] and the 16th Assembly District, represented by
Democrat Rebecca Bauer-Kahan.[4] Federally, Pleasanton is in California's 15th
congressional district, represented by Democrat Eric Swalwell.[5]

Pleasanton has 44,099 registered voters with 17,021 (39.2%) registered as
Democrats, 11,338 (25.7%) registered as Republicans, and 13,867 (31.4%)
Decline to State voters.[44]

Pleasanton's daily newspaper is the _Pleasanton Weekly_ , a newspaper that is
posted every Friday.

Pleasanton is situated at the crossroads of two major Interstate Highways,
I-580 and I-680, which mirror the historic cross-routes of Native American
tribes who used the precursor paths as major trading routes. This fact was
first discovered with the excavations for Hacienda Business Park, revealing
significant tribal artifacts and human skeletal remains.[45]

The city is served by two stations on the Bay Area Rapid Transit (BART) heavy
rail system's Dublin/Pleasanton–Daly City line, which runs along the northern
boundary of the city:

The Altamont Corridor Express rail service stops near Pleasanton's downtown at
Pleasanton Station.

The WHEELS bus transit system, which has a number of routes in the city,
serves Pleasanton including the above three stations.

Pleasanton's two comprehensive high schools, Amador Valley and Foothill, are
ranked by _Newsweek_ among the top 400 high schools in the nation.[47] There
are also two continuation high schools: Village and Horizon; the latter is for
school age mothers and young fathers.

People from Pleasanton include:

