**Portuñol** (Spanish spelling) or **Portunhol** (Portuguese spelling)
(![About this
sound](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Loudspeaker.svg/11px-
Loudspeaker.svg.png)pronunciation) is a portmanteau of the words
**Portugués/Português** ("Portuguese") and **Español/Espanhol** ("Spanish"),
and is the name often given to any unsystematic mixture of Portuguese and
Spanish.[1] Close examination reveals it to be "a polyvalent term ( _portuñol_
/ _portunhol_ ) used to describe a wide range of phenomena, including
spontaneous contact vernaculars in border regions, errors produced by speakers
attempting to speak the L2 correctly, and idiosyncratic invented speech
designed to facilitate communication between the two languages."[2]

Portuñol/Portunhol, is frequently a pidgin, or simplified mixture of the two
languages, that allows speakers of either Spanish or Portuguese who are not
proficient in the other language to communicate with one another.[3] When
speakers of one of the languages attempt to speak the other language, there is
often interference from the native language, which causes the phenomenon of
code-switching to occur.[2] It is possible to conduct a moderately fluent
conversation in this way because Portuguese and Spanish are closely related
Romance languages. They have almost identical syntactic structures, as well as
overlapping lexicons due to cognates, which means that a single macro-grammar
is produced when the two mix.[2] An example for literary effect, "not based on
accurate imitations of the speech of border regions",[2] is the phrase _en el
hueco de la noite longa e langue_ , illustrating a code-mix of the Spanish
article _la_ and the Portuguese noun _noite_. [2]

Language contact between Spanish and Portuguese is the result of sustained
contact between the two languages in border communities and multilingual trade
environments.[2] Such regions include the border regions between Portugal and
Spain in the Iberian Peninsula, as well as the ones between Brazil, whose
official language is Portuguese,[4] and most of its neighboring countries
whose official languages are Spanish.[4] Because _Portuñol_ is a spontaneous
register resulting from the occasional mixing of Spanish and Portuguese, it is
highly diverse;[1] there is no one dialect or standard of _Portuñol_. There
does, however, tend to be a stronger presence of Spanish in _Portuñol_.[3]

In recent years, _Portuñol_ has begun to appear in realms other than everyday
speech. It has become a literary medium, especially in Uruguay and Brazil.
María Jesus Fernández García describes it as a linguistic recreation of the
actual language. However, she goes on to say that the literature only
occasionally provides a true representation of _Portuñol_ , and that authors
often choose to select only some of the features that are characteristic of
_Portuñol_.[1] One important literary work written in _Portuñol_ is _Mar
paraguayo_ by Brazilian author Wilson Bueno. The following passage shows the
mixing of Spanish and Portuguese in his novel.

The appearance of _Portuñol_ has prompted two opposing opinions or attitudes
towards its existence. On the one hand, it is viewed as the product of
laziness among speakers unwilling to learn a different language. On the other
hand, it is seen as the logical product of globalization.[2] As far as the
future of _Portuñol_ is concerned, according to Francisco A. Marcos-Marín, it
is too difficult to evaluate possible repercussions that _Portuñol_ could have
on future linguistic maps because it is not easy to separate linguistic
tendencies that are merely in style and those that are permanent.[3]

