**Preston** /ˈprɛstən/ (![About this
sound](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Loudspeaker.svg/11px-
Loudspeaker.svg.png)listen) is a city and the administrative centre of
Lancashire, England, on the north bank of the River Ribble.

The City of Preston local government district obtained city status in 2002,
becoming England's 50th city in the 50th year of Queen Elizabeth II's
reign.[1] Preston has a population of 114,300, the City of Preston district
132,000[2] and the Preston Built-up Area 313,322.[3] The Preston Travel To
Work Area, in 2011, had a population of 420,661[4] compared to 354,000 in the
previous census.

Preston and its surrounding area have provided evidence of ancient Roman
activity, largely in the form of a Roman road which led to a camp at Walton-
le-Dale. The Angles established Preston; its name is derived from the Old
English meaning "priest's settlement" and in the _Domesday Book_ is recorded
as "Prestune". In the Middle Ages, Preston was a parish and township in the
hundred of Amounderness and was granted a Guild Merchant charter in 1179,
giving it the status of a market town. Textiles have been produced since the
mid-13th century when locally produced wool was woven in people's houses.
Flemish weavers who settled in the area in the 14th century helped develop the
industry. In the early-18th century, Edmund Calamy described Preston as "a
pretty town with an abundance of gentry in it, commonly called Proud
Preston".[5] Sir Richard Arkwright, inventor of the spinning frame, was born
in the town. The most rapid period of growth and development coincided with
the industrialisation and expansion of textile manufacturing. Preston was a
boomtown of the Industrial Revolution, becoming a densely populated
engineering centre, with large industrial plants. The town's textile sector
fell into terminal decline from the mid-20th century and Preston has
subsequently faced similar challenges to other post-industrial northern towns,
including deindustrialisation, economic deprivation and housing issues.

Preston is the seat of Lancashire County Council, houses the main campus of
the University of Central Lancashire (UCLan) and is home to Preston North End
F.C., a founder member of the Football League and the first English football
champions.

Preston is recorded in the _Domesday Book_ as "Prestune" in 1086.[6] Various
other spellings occur in early documents: "Prestonam" (1094), "Prestone"
(1160), "Prestona" (1160), "Presteton" (1180), and "Prestun" (1226). The
modern spelling occurs in 1094, 1176, 1196, 1212 and 1332.[7] The town's name
is derived from Old English _Presta_ and _Tun_ , the _Tun_ (enclosure,
farmstead, village, manor, estate)[8] of the _Presta_ (priest or priests).[9]

During the Roman period, Roman roads passed close to what is now the centre of
Preston. For example, the road from Luguvalium to Mamucium (now Carlisle to
Manchester) crossed the River Ribble at Walton-le-Dale, 3⁄4 mile (1 km)
southeast of the centre of Preston, and a Roman camp or station may also have
been here.[10][11] At Withy Trees, 1 1⁄2 miles (2 km) north of Preston, the
road crossed another Roman road from Bremetennacum (the Roman fort at
Ribchester) to the coast.[12]

An explanation of the origin of the name is that the Priest's Town refers to a
priory set up by St Wilfrid near the Ribble's lowest ford. This idea is
supported by the similarity of the Paschal lamb on Preston's crest with that
on St Wilfrid's.[13]

When first mentioned in the 1086 Domesday Book, Preston was already the most
important town in Amounderness (the area of Central Lancashire between the
rivers Ribble and Cocker, including The Fylde and the Forest of Bowland). When
assessed for tax purposes in 1218 – 19 it was the wealthiest town in the whole
county.[14]

The right to hold a _Guild Merchant_ was conferred by King Henry II upon the
burgesses of Preston in a charter of 1179; the associated Preston Guild is a
civic celebration held every 20 years and 2012 was the latest guild year. It
is the only guild still celebrated in the UK.[15]

Before 1328, celebrations were held at irregular intervals, but at the guild
of that year it was decreed that subsequent guilds should be held every 20
years. After this, there were breaks in the pattern for various reasons, but
an unbroken series were held from 1542 to 1922. A full 400-year sequence was
frustrated by the cancellation of the 1942 guild due to World War II, but the
cycle resumed in 1952. The expression '(Once) every Preston Guild', meaning
'very infrequently', has passed into fairly common use, especially in
Lancashire.

Guild week is always started by the opening of the Guild Court, which since
the 16th century has traditionally been on the first Monday after the feast of
the Beheading of John the Baptist celebrated on 29 August. As well as concerts
and other exhibitions, the main events are a series of processions through the
city. Numerous street parties are held in the locality.

In 1952 the emphasis was on the bright new world emerging after the war. The
major event, held in the city's Avenham Park, had every school participating,
and hundreds of children, from toddlers to teenagers, demonstrated different
aspects of physical education in the natural amphitheatre of the park.

In 1972 participants at the Avenham Park celebrations were treated to a low
level, low speed, flypast by Concorde.[ _citation needed_ ]

The 2012 guild formally opened on 2 September with a mayoral proclamation and
the return of "friendship scrolls" that had travelled the world.[16]
Highlights in the programme for the 2012 celebration included two concerts in
Avenham Park - one by Human League and another, a "Proms In The Park",
featuring José Carreras, Katherine Jenkins and the Manchester Camerata.

In the mid-12th century, Preston was in the hundred of Amounderness, in the
deanery of Amounderness and the archdeaconry of Richmond. The name
"Amounderness" is more ancient than the name of any other "Wapentake" or
hundred in the County of Lancashire, and the fort at Tulketh, strengthened by
William the Conqueror, shows that the strategic importance of the area was
appreciated even then.[17]

The location of the city, almost exactly midway between Glasgow and London,
led to many decisive battles being fought here, most notably during the
English Civil War at the Battle of Preston (1648), and then the first Jacobite
rebellion, whose invasion of England was brought to a conclusion by the defeat
of the pro-Catholic and pro-monarchial Jacobite army at the Battle of Preston
(1715). Letitia Elizabeth Landon alludes to this latter defeat in her poem
_Preston_ in Fisher's Drawing Room Scrap Book 1834.

In the last great Jacobite Rising, on 27 November 1745 the Jacobite Prince of
Wales and Regent, Bonnie Prince Charlie passed through Preston with his
Highland Army on the way south through Chorley and Manchester to Derby
intending to take London and the Crown. Preston was the first of quite a few
places in England where the Prince was cheered as he rode by and where he was
joined by some English volunteers for his Army. One Jacobite eyewitness noted
that from Preston onwards, "at every town we were received with ringing of
bells, and at night we have bonfires, and illuminations".[18] Another Jacobite
eyewitness noted in a private letter from Preston on 27 November 1745: "People
here are beginning to join [us] very fast; we have got about sixty recruits
today".[19] From 10 to 12 December the Prince gave his retreating Army a rest
in Preston on their long, last and fatal retreat from Derby through Lancaster
and Carlisle to their dreadful day of destiny the following 16 April on
Culloden Moor near Inverness.[20]

The 19th century saw a transformation in Preston from a small market town to a
much larger industrial one, as the innovations of the latter half of the
previous century such as Richard Arkwright's water frame (invented in Preston)
brought cotton mills to many northern English towns. With industrialisation
came examples of both oppression and enlightenment.

The town's forward-looking spirit is typified by it being the first English
town outside London to be lit by gas. The Preston Gas Company was established
in 1815 by, amongst others, a Catholic priest: Rev. Joseph "Daddy" Dunn of the
Society of Jesus. The Preston and Wigan Railway arrived in 1838, shortly
afterwards renamed the North Union Railway.[21] The Sheffield firm of Thos W
Ward Ltd opened a ship breaking yard at Preston Dock in 1894.[22]

The more oppressive side of industrialisation was seen during the Preston
Strike of 1842 on Saturday 13 August 1842, when a group of cotton workers
demonstrated against the poor conditions in the town's mills. The Riot Act was
read and armed troops corralled the demonstrators in front of the Corn
Exchange on Lune Street. Shots were fired and four of the demonstrators were
killed. A commemorative sculpture now stands on the spot (although the
soldiers and demonstrators represented are facing the wrong way). In the
1850s, Karl Marx visited Preston and later described the town as "the next St
Petersburg".[23] Charles Dickens visited Preston in January 1854 during a
strike by cotton workers that had by that stage lasted for 23 weeks. This was
part of his research for the novel _Hard Times_ in which the town of
"Coketown" is based on the city of Preston. In 1858, the Preston Power Loom
Weavers' Association was founded, and by 1920 it had more than 13,000 members
in the town.[24]

The Preston Temperance Society, led by Joseph Livesey pioneered the Temperance
Movement in the 19th century. Indeed, the term teetotalism is believed to have
been coined at one of its meetings. The website of the University of Central
Lancashire library has a great deal of information on Joseph Livesey and the
Temperance Movement in Preston.[25]

Preston was one of only a few industrial towns in Lancashire to have a
functioning corporation (local council) in 1835 (its charter dating to 1685),
and was reformed as a municipal borough by the Municipal Corporations Act
1835. It became the County Borough of Preston under the Local Government Act
1888. In 1974, county boroughs were abolished, and it became part of the
larger part of the new non-metropolitan district, the Borough of Preston,
which also included Fulwood Urban District and much of Preston Rural District.
The borough acquired city status in 2002.

By 1901, nearly 120,000 people were living in Preston, now a booming
industrial town.

New industries arrived in Preston during the interwar years which helped ease
the pain felt through the sharp decline of the cotton industry. Electrical
goods manufacturing and engineering arrived in the town, and the building
sector enjoyed a boom with nearly 3,000 council houses being built between
1920 and 1939. Some 1,500 houses were built for private sale.[ _citation
needed_ ]

Despite its heavy industry, Preston endured only a handful of Luftwaffe air
raids in World War II and there were no fatalities in the town, although an
air crash in the Freckleton district claimed the lives of 61 people in 1944.

For some 20 years after 1948, Preston became home to a significant number of
Asian and Caribbean Commonwealth immigrants, who mostly worked in the
manufacturing industry. However, an economic decline hit the town once again
in the 1970s, capped by the closure of the Courtaulds factory in 1979 (nearly
3,000 job losses) and the decline of the docks on the River Ribble, which
finally closed in 1981. Mass unemployment was firmly back in Preston by the
early 1980s, although it was now very much a national crisis due to the
recession of that time.

The rehousing of families from town centre slums to new council houses
continued after World War II, though it slowed down to a virtual standstill
after 1975.[ _citation needed_ ] The face of the town centre began to change
in the 1960s, with old developments being bulldozed and replaced by modern
developments such as the St George's Shopping Centre, which opened in 1966,
and the Fishergate Shopping Centre which was built nearly 20 years later. The
remains of the Victorian town hall, designed by George Gilbert Scott and
mostly destroyed by fire in 1947, were replaced by an office block (Crystal
House) in 1962, and a modern-architecture Guild Hall opened in 1972, to
replace the Public Hall.

The town was by-passed by Britain's very first motorway which opened in 1958
and within a decade formed part of the M6 – giving Preston a direct motorway
link with Manchester and Birmingham. The late 1960s saw the completion of
Ringway, a bypass around the town centre, as well as a new bus station.[26]

On 6 April 2012 the city's residents performed the _Preston Passion_ , a
dramatised version of the Passion of Christ, which was broadcast live by BBC
One.[27]

The unparished urban settlement of Preston is represented by 19 of the 22
council wards within Preston City Council. Preston is currently divided
between two Westminster constituencies, namely Preston and Wyre and Preston
North. The County Hall is located on Fishergate and is the main office for
Lancashire County Council.[28] Preston Council Buildings are found on
Lancaster Road.

The River Ribble provides a southern border for the city. The Forest of
Bowland forms a backdrop to Preston to the northeast while the Fylde lies to
the west. At 53°45′N 2°42′W﻿ / ﻿53.750°N 2.700°W﻿ / 53.750; -2.700, Preston is
approximately 27 miles (43 km) north west of Manchester, 26 miles (42 km)
north east of Liverpool, and 15 miles (24 km) east of the coastal town
Blackpool.

The current borders came into effect on 1 April 1974, when the Local
Government Act 1972 merged the existing County Borough of Preston with Fulwood
Urban District as an unparished area within the Borough of Preston. Preston
was designated as part of the Central Lancashire new town in 1970.

The climate of Preston is of a temperate maritime type, with a narrow range of
temperatures, similar to the rest of the British Isles. Being relatively close
to the Irish sea, this is more pronounced than areas to the south and east of
Preston. The official Met Office weather station is located at Moor Park, less
than 1 mile (1.6 km) north of the city centre, and surrounded by built up
areas, suggesting a degree of urban warming is likely, particularly during
clear and calm nights.

The absolute high recorded at the weather station was 33.1 °C (91.6 °F)[29]
during August 1990. In a typical year the warmest day should reach 27.6 °C
(81.7 °F)[30] and 5.9 days[31] in total should attain a maximum temperature of
25.1 °C (77.2 °F) or more. In October 2011, a new record October high
temperature of 26.9 °C was set.[32]

The absolute minimum is −13.3 °C (8.1 °F), recorded during February 1969.[33]
In a typical year the coldest night should fall to −6.8 °C (19.8 °F),[34] and
40.2 nights[35] should receive an air frost. The lowest temperature in recent
years was −9.2 °C (15.4 °F)[36] during December 2010.

Annual rainfall totals just under 1000 mm per year,[37] with over 1 mm of
precipitation falling on 150 days.[38] All averages refer to the period
1971–2000.

Preston has a strong Roman Catholic Christian history and tradition, recently
noted by Archbishop Vincent Nichols in his Guild 2012 Mass Homily: "The
history of the Christian and Catholic faith is long and deep here in Preston."
[40] with one of the proposed derivations of its name coming from 'Priests
town'. The lamb on the city shield is a biblical image of Jesus Christ, and
the same image that represented 7th century bishop St Wilfrid, the city's
patron saint who is historically linked to the city's establishment. The "PP"
on the city shield stands for "Princeps Pacis" (Prince of Peace), another
title for Christ invoking Him as protector of the city, though it is also
often taken to stand for the city's nickname "Proud Preston". In fact there
were originally three letters "P" on the coat of arms, with one being lost
over time.[41]

Preston lies in the Roman Catholic Diocese of Lancaster and the Anglican
Diocese of Blackburn. There are at least 73 churches, chapels, missions and
meeting houses, as well as 15 cemeteries and burial sites, for which records
exist.[42] A wide range of denominations are, or have been, represented in the
city including: Latin Rite Catholics, Baptist, Christadelphian,
Congregational, Countess of Huntingdon's Connexion, Evangelical, Methodist,
Pentecostal, Presbyterian, Swedenborgian and Wesleyan Methodist. The Society
of Friends meet at the Preston Friends Meeting House at 189 St George's
Road.[43]

In July 2016, St Ignatius Church in Preston, which had been gifted by the
Catholic Diocese of Lancaster to the Syro-Malabar Catholic community, was
raised to the status of a Cathedral by Pope Francis. It now serves as the seat
of the Syro-Malabar Catholic Eparchy of Great Britain [44][45]

Built in 1826 for the Calvinistic Methodists of Lady Huntington, the Carey
Baptist church, on Pole Street, was formerly known as St Paul's Chapel. It was
purchased by the Baptists in 1855. The church survives today and remains very
active in the community.[46]

St. John's Minster, formerly the Church of St John the Evangelist and prior to
the reformation; St Wilfrid's Parish Church, is located on Church Street, in
the centre of the city. From its origin it has been the parish church of
Preston. The church of St George the Martyr, located on Georges Road, was
founded in 1723.[47] One of the many large active Roman Catholic parish
churches is St Thomas of Canterbury and the English Martyrs, located on
Garstang Road.[48]

Preston was the location of the world's first foreign mission of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (commonly known as the Mormons). As early as
1837 the first Mormon missionaries to Great Britain began preaching in Preston
and, in particular, other small towns situated along the River Ribble. Preston
is home to the world's oldest continuous branch (a small congregation) of the
LDS Church.[49] An official memorial to the church pioneers may be found in
the Japanese Garden in Avenham Park. In 1998 the LDS erected a large temple at
Chorley, near Preston, described by The Telegraph newspaper as
"spectacular".[50] The temple is officially known as the Preston England
Temple.

Preston has a significant Muslim (Sunni Branch, particularly Hanafi school)
population, the majority of which is of Gujarati Indian descent. The Muslim
population is centred in the Deepdale, Riversway, Fishwick, Fulwood and
Frenchwood areas. Preston has 12 mosques: five in Deepdale & St George's, one
in Frenchwood, one in Riversway, two in Adelphi and three in Fishwick.[
_citation needed_ ]

The 2001 Census recorded 72% of the population of the City of Preston as
Christians, 10% as having no religion, and 8% as Muslims.[51] The Hindu and
Sikh populations are smaller at 3% and 0.6% respectively, but in both cases
this represents the highest percentage of any local authority area in the
North West. 2% of the city's population were born in other EU countries.
Though still small in number in Preston, the Mormons maintain a large profile.

Preston has places of worship for people of a wide variety of religions,
including churches of many Christian denominations. There are also places of
worship for Buddhists, Hindus, Muslims, the Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormons,
Sikhs and The Salvation Army, amongst others. Preston was also home to an
Ashkenazi Orthodox Jewish synagogue on Avenham Place, formed in 1882, but this
closed during the mid-1980s.[52]

The demonym for residents of the city is "Prestonian", and the centre of the
city is referred to by residents colloquially as "The Gate".[53][54]

St Walburge's Church, designed by Joseph Hansom of Hansom Cab fame, has, at 94
metres (308 ft), the tallest spire in England on a church that is not a
cathedral.[55] There are also many notable buildings dotted in and around the
city centre including the Miller Arcade, the Town Hall, the Harris Museum, the
Minster Church of St. John the Evangelist (formerly Preston Parish Church,
elevated to Minster church status in June 2003), the former Corn Exchange and
Public Hall, St. Wilfrid's Catholic Church, Fishergate Baptist Church, and
many beautiful Georgian buildings on Winckley Square. Many Catholic and
Anglican parish churches are also to be found throughout the city. HMP Preston
is also a good example of a typical Victorian radial-design prison. Modern
architecture is represented by the Guild Hall and Preston Bus Station, which
was featured on the 2012 World Monument Fund's list of sites at risk due to
threats of demolition,[56][57] before becoming Grade II listed.

and hundreds more[58]

The chimney of the Grade II listed Tulketh Mill, recently[ _when?_ ] fully
exposed on the Blackpool Road, provides an impressive reminder of Preston's
industrial heritage. The mill itself, designed by engineer Fred Dixon of
Bolton for the Tulketh Spinning Company, dates from 1905.[59] The huge chimney
has been lowered twice – in the 1930s and again in the 1960s.

Preston is a major centre of the British defence aerospace industry with BAE
Systems, the UK's principal military aircraft design, development and
manufacture supplier, having its Military Aircraft headquarters located in
nearby Warton. The company has two of its major facilities located some miles
on either side of the city. BAE Warton is located to the western side of the
city whilst BAE Samlesbury is located to the east, over the M6 motorway. BAE
Systems also operate large office facilities at the Portway area within the
city and at The Strand office complex.

The Westinghouse Electric Company (formerly BNFL) Springfields nuclear
processing plant also lies to the west of the city boundary at Salwick.

The city is home to Alstom Transport's main UK spare parts distribution centre
(formerly GEC Traction Ltd). Matalan Retail Ltd was also founded in Preston
under the name Matalan Cash and Carry. Although the head office of Matalan
moved to Skelmersdale in 1998, the city still has the tax office for the
company (located in Winckley Square).

Haulage supplier and operator James Hall and Co who supply produce for Spar
stores in the north of England have their head office located just off the M6
Junction 31a at Bowland View. This is the biggest building in the city of
Preston.[60]

The financial sector also has a large presence in the city with a large
selection of consultancies, insurance and law firms including national debt
collection agency iQor Recovery Services Ltd. based in Winckley Square in the
city centre.

Goss Graphic Systems Limited, a global supplier of printing presses based in
the United States, formerly employed more than 1,000 people in Preston, but in
2007 the company moved manufacturing to the United States, China and Japan and
now has around 160 employees in the city.[61]

On 20 February 2006, the telecommunications company The Carphone Warehouse
took over Tulketh Mill (formerly the home of the Littlewoods catalogue call
centre) in the Ashton-on-Ribble area of the city. The building has undergone
an extensive interior refurbishment and since March 2007 has been the
workplace of some 800 employees. The site's main purpose is as a call centre
for the broadband and landline services provider TalkTalk as well as LLU
business Opal Telecom. The site also houses call centres for Geek Squad and
Best Buy both of which along with The Carphone Warehouse are now part of Best
Buy Europe. It was officially opened on 19 December 2006 by CEO Charles
Dunstone and the Mayor of Preston.

Skiddle is an event ticketing operation based in Preston since 2001, which
claims to be the UK's largest what's on guide.

Due to Preston's location as a transport hub, sitting between the M6, M55,
M65, and M61 it is home to several freight and haulage companies.

The Riversway area (in the Ashton-on-Ribble area of the city) is also home to
the Preston Docklands, once Europe's largest single dock basin, which has
undergone redevelopment. Several office areas around the docks, along with
significant residential presence. Several small businesses such as the
Football League's LFE headquarters[62] are based in the area, together with
Riversway Developments[63] who have been responsible for some of this
redevelopment.

Retail is also a major contributor to Preston's economy. The city houses two
major shopping centres:

Another shopping centre in Preston is the Miller Arcade, a specialist shopping
centre in a listed building, which formerly included public baths, situated
next to the Harris Museum.

Preston's main high streets are Fishergate and Friargate which offer shops,
bars and restaurants with many more tucked away down the side streets. The
first Kentucky Fried Chicken outlet in the UK was opened on Fishergate in
1965.[64]

An £800 million[65] regeneration project known as the Tithebarn Project was
also planned for Preston. The project was originally managed by property
giants Grosvenor and Lend Lease Corporation, Grosvenor withdrew from the
project,[66] followed a few years later by Lend Lease. The project was
dependent upon a number of requirements (such as the re-location of the
current Bus Station, which would cost at least £25million, and be funded
largely by the taxpayer).[67] In November 2011, it was announced that John
Lewis, who were originally intended to be the major flagship store of the
Tithebarn development had also withdrawn from the project, effectively killing
it.[68] The council is now exploring more piecemeal ways of bringing in
development[69] and Jeremy Corbyn praises Preston for its "inspiring
innovation".[70]

Since city status was awarded in the Queen's Jubilee year, Preston was
targeted by a number of developers. Residential developments were particularly
popular with new apartments planned in and around the city centre. Many of
these developments however are still struggling to find buyers for these
apartments, and there are rising numbers of repossessions.[71] Office and
hotel space is also in demand and a new Central Business District is being
planned as well as a number of new hotels.

Unemployment in Preston rose 15% in the year up to April 2012 to a total of
3,783 claimants.[72]

The Preston By-pass, opened 5 December 1958, became the first stretch of
motorway in the UK and is now part of the M6 with a short section now forming
part of the M55. It was built to ease traffic congestion caused by tourists
travelling to the popular destinations of Blackpool and The Lake District. The
first traffic cones were used during its construction, replacing red lantern
paraffin burners.

In the 1980s, a motorway around the west of the city which would have been an
extension of the M65 to the M55 was started but never finished. That is the
reason that the M55 has no junction 2, because it was reserved for the new
western bypass. The M6 between junctions 30 and 32 was widened extensively
between 1993–95 to compensate. Junction 31A which has only a northbound exit
and a southbound entry opened in 1997 to serve a nearby business park.

Other motorways terminating close to the city are the M61 – Preston to
Manchester via Chorley and Bolton, the M65 – Preston to Colne via Blackburn,
Accrington and Burnley and the M55 – Preston to Blackpool via Kirkham.

Preston railway station opened in 1838 and has since been rebuilt and extended
several times. It is a major stop on the West Coast Main Line, with long
distance train services to London (Euston) in the south and Glasgow and
Edinburgh, Aberdeen, Inverness and Fort William to the north. Preston is the
hub for connecting rail services in the North West, with direct services to
Blackpool, Lancaster, Blackburn, Bradford, Leeds, Wigan, Bolton, Manchester,
Liverpool and Ormskirk.

The lines to Southport and Longridge closed to passengers in 1965 and 1930
respectively. The disused tracks of the Longridge line are extant as far as
Deepdale. In 2010 plans were put forward to use part of this line for a
demonstration tram system.[73] The heritage Ribble Steam Railway is located in
Riversway.

The former Preston Port, known as Riversway or the Docks, has been the site of
an expanding commercial and residential complex since 1988.

The Marina is just north of the River Ribble which enters into the east of the
Irish Sea. This marina has its own chandlery and coffee shop, training courses
and boat sales.

There are multimillion-pound plans to redevelop Preston's docks (as well as
large sections of the River Ribble running through the city) to introduce
leisure facilities (watersports), new landmark buildings, a new central park
opposite Avenham Park, office and retail space, new residential developments
and the re-opening of some of Preston's old canal. However, these plans,
collectively known as Riverworks, have yet to undergo public consultation, and
have already raised concerns amongst locals due to the potential loss of green
space and increased risk of flooding.[74]

Five main bus operators serve Preston. Preston Bus, formerly the city's
municipal bus company, served the district and operated a route between
Preston and Penwortham. In October 2006, Preston Bus started operating two
orbital bus routes.[75]

Many services between Preston and the surrounding area were operated by Ribble
Motor Services which became part of the Stagecoach Group, using the name
Stagecoach in Lancashire. Several of its routes were branded "Preston Citi";
they operated to Fulwood, Ribbleton, Penwortham, Longton, Walton-le-dale,
Walmer Bridge, New Longton, Bamber Bridge, Longridge, Southport and Leyland.
Stagecoach provided links to Blackpool, Blackburn, Bolton, Chorley, Liverpool,
Manchester and Wigan as well as Lancaster and Morecambe under the Stagecoach
in Lancaster service.

Competition for routes and passengers resulted in a bus war between the two
companies after buses were deregulated in Great Britain.

On 23 January 2009, Preston Bus was sold to Stagecoach[76] for over £10.4
million. Routes were changed and the services were branded Stagecoach in
Preston. Following a lengthy investigation which began soon after the
takeover, the Competition Commission ruled on 11 November 2009 that the action
by Stagecoach had adversely affected competition in the area and ordered it to
sell Preston Bus. In January 2011, the Rotala Group announced they had agreed
to take over Preston Bus.[76]

Blackburn Bus Company, part of the Transdev group, operates the 152 Hotline
route to Blackburn and Burnley. An independent company, John Fishwick & Sons,
that provided frequent services into the city centre for Lower Penwortham,
Lostock Hall, Leyland, Euxton and Chorley, ceased trading in October 2015.

Preston also has a park and ride from two sites; one at Portway in the
Riversway area, and the other off the A6 at Walton-le-Dale.

Preston is served by national bus services. Stagecoach, National Express,
Eurolines, and Megabus have a presence at Preston bus station which is claimed
by some residents to be the largest or second largest station in Europe.[77]

Preston was one of the first cities in the UK to have displays fitted to every
bus stop which aim to provide an accurate time and destination of the next bus
arriving using GPS tracking.[78] The service, initially restricted to services
within the borough, was expanded to cover Fishwick's 111 City Centre/Leyland
route but was discontinued in 2011,[79] and reinstated on some routes in 2013.

Although not a public airport, Warton Aerodrome is an active airfield west of
the city and is the airfield for the BAE Warton factory. BAE Samlesbury to the
east of the town was an active aerodrome, with a gliding club, but today
serves as a facility for BAE Systems and no longer supports flying activities.

The nearest airports from Preston with scheduled service are Liverpool John
Lennon Airport and Manchester Airport, about 40 miles (64 km) south-west and
south-east of the city respectively. Manchester Airport is linked by a direct
rail service operated by Transpennine Express.

The Guild Wheel is a public footpath and cycle route, created in 2012 in
celebration of the Preston Guild and officially opened in August of that
year.[80] 21 miles (34 km) in length, it encircles Preston, linking the city
to the countryside and surrounding villages.[81]

The city is home to the University of Central Lancashire. Formerly known as
The Harris Institute, Preston Polytechnic, and more recently (1985–1992) as
Lancashire Polytechnic, "UCLan" is now the sixth largest university in the
country, with over 33,000 students.[82]

Preston has a number of local radio stations:

Other regional stations which include Preston within their coverage include:

The _Lancashire Evening Post_ is based in Fulwood.

Blog Preston[83] is a hyperlocal news website which provides community news,
views and information about the city.[84][85]

Television is provided by ITV Granada, the ITV franchise holder for the North
West region, BBC North West, the regional BBC station for the North West
region, and a local TV service for Blackpool and Preston, That's Lancashire,
from studios at the Northern Lights Business Centre in the University of
Central Lancashire's Media Factory building.

Preston North End F.C. were one of the founder members of the Football League
and the first team to be crowned English football champions.[86] They play at
Deepdale Football Ground which was also the original site of the National
Football Museum. The museum closed in 2011 in preparation for its move to
Manchester due to funding issues.

Dick, Kerr's Ladies, one of the most famous early women's football teams in
Britain, called Preston home. Preston were champions of the Football League in
its first two seasons, but have not won it since. Their last major trophy came
in 1938 when they won the FA Cup, and they have not played top division
football since 1961. They are one of the few English league clubs to have been
champions of all four tiers of the English professional league.[ _citation
needed_ ]

England Test Cricket player Andrew Flintoff is a Preston native, and was
granted freedom of the city following the Ashes victory of 2005.

Preston Grasshoppers RFC play in the National Division Two North, the third
tier of English rugby union.

Preston is also the home of Lancashire's first roller derby league. The local
team, Preston Roller Girls, have been playing since 2011.

Preston Hockey Club was established in 1903.

The Preston Arena is used for cycle racing. The Preston Arena is frequently
used by the University of Central Lancashire, based in Preston.

The Preston Mountaineering Club is based in the town and has been in existence
for over 70 years.

Speedway racing, then known as Dirt Track Racing was staged at Farringdon Park
in the late 1920s and early 1930s. The Preston team raced in the English Dirt
Track League of 1929 and the Northern League of 1930 and 1931. The best known
rider of the team was Joe "Iron Man" Abbott who went on to Test Match
successes riding before the war for Belle Vue. After the war Joe appeared for
Harringay and Bradford.

There is a bowling centre at Greenbank Street.[87]

Preston is twinned with: [95] [96]

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-
Commons-logo.svg.png) Media related to Preston, Lancashire at Wikimedia
Commons

