**Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory** ( **PPPL** ) is a United States
Department of Energy national laboratory for plasma physics and nuclear fusion
science. Its primary mission is research into and development of fusion as an
energy source.

PPPL grew out of the top secret Cold War project to control thermonuclear
reactions, called **Project Matterhorn**. In 1961, after declassification,
Project Matterhorn was renamed the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory.[3]

PPPL is located on Princeton University's Forrestal Campus in Plainsboro
Township, New Jersey. This is some distance from the main Princeton campus,
but the lab has a Princeton address.

In 1950, John Wheeler was setting up a secret H-bomb research lab at Princeton
University. Lyman Spitzer, Jr., an avid mountaineer, was aware of this program
and suggested the name "Project Matterhorn".[4]

Spitzer, a professor of Astronomy, had for many years been involved in the
study of very hot rarefied gases in interstellar space. While leaving for a
ski trip to Aspen in February 1951, his father called and told him to read the
front page of the _New York Times_. The paper had a story about claims
released the day before in Argentina that a relatively unknown German
scientist named Ronald Richter had achieved nuclear fusion in his Huemul
Project.[5] Spitzer ultimately dismissed these claims, and they were later
proven erroneous, but the story got him thinking about fusion. While riding
the chairlift at Aspen, he struck upon a new concept to confine a plasma for
long periods so it could be heated to fusion temperatures. He called this
concept the stellarator.

Later that year he took this design to the Atomic Energy Commission in
Washington. As a result of this meeting and a review of the invention by
scientists throughout the nation, the stellarator proposal was funded in 1951.
As the device would produce high-energy neutrons, which could be used for
breeding weapon fuel, the program was classified and carried out as part of
Project Matterhorn. Matterhorn ultimately ended its involvement in the bomb
field in 1954, becoming entirely devoted to the fusion power field.

In 1958, this magnetic fusion research was declassified following the 1955
United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy.
This generated an influx of graduate students eager to learn the "new"
physics, which in turn influenced the lab to concentrate more on basic
research.[6]

The early figure-8 stellarators included : Model-A, Model-B, Model-B2,
Model-B3.[7] Model-B64 was a square with round corners, and Model-B65 was a
racetrack configuration.[7] The last and most powerful stellarator at this
time was the 'racetrack' Model C (operating from 1961 to 1969).[8] The Model C
was reconfigured as a tokamak in 1969,[7] becoming the Symmetric Tokamak
(ST).[9]

In the 1970s research at the PPPL refocused on the Russian tokamak design when
it became evident that it was a more satisfactory containment design than the
stellarator. In May 1972 the Adiabatic Toroidal Compressor (ATC) began
operation. The Princeton Large Torus, a tokamak, operated from 1975.

By 1982, the PPPL under the direction of Harold Furth had the Tokamak Fusion
Test Reactor (TFTR) online, which operated until 1997.[10] Beginning in 1993,
TFTR was the first in the world to use 50/50 mixtures of deuterium-tritium. In
1994 it yielded an unprecedented 10.7 megawatts of fusion power.[10]

In 1999, the National Spherical Torus Experiment (NSTX), based on the
spherical tokamak concept, came online at the PPPL. Laboratory scientists are
collaborating with researchers on fusion science and technology at other
facilities, both domestic and foreign. Staff are applying knowledge gained in
fusion research to a number of theoretical and experimental areas including
materials science, solar physics, chemistry, and manufacturing.

Odd-parity heating was demonstrated in the 4 cm radius PFRC-1 experiment in
2006. PFRC-2 has a plasma radius of 8 cm. Studies of electron heating in
PFRC-2 reached 500 eV with pulse lengths of 300 ms.[11]

In 2015, the U.S. Department of Energy's Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory
(PPPL) completed the National Spherical Torus Experiment Upgrade (NSTX-U) that
makes it the most powerful experimental fusion facility, or tokamak, of its
type in the world. Experiments will test the ability of the upgraded spherical
facility to maintain a high-performance plasma under conditions of extreme
heat and power. Results could strongly influence the design of future fusion
reactors.[12]

In 2017, the group received a Phase II NIAC grant along with two NASA STTRs
funding the RF subsystem and superconducting coil subsystem.[11]

In 1961 Gottlieb became the first director of the renamed Princeton Plasma
Physics Laboratory.[13][14]

