**Prometheus Global Media** was a New York City-based B2B media company. The
company was formed in December 2009, when Nielsen Company sold its
entertainment and media division to a private equity-backed group led by
Pluribus Capital Management and Guggenheim Partners. Guggenheim acquired
Pluribus's stake in the company in January 2013, giving it full ownership
under the division of Guggenheim Digital Media.

The company owned and operated a number of major entertainment industry trade
publications and their associated digital properties, including _Adweek_ ,
_Backstage_ , _Billboard_ , _Film Journal International_ , and _The Hollywood
Reporter_.

On December 17, 2015, it was announced that Guggenheim would spin out its
media properties to a group led by former executive Todd Boehly, known as
Eldridge Industries.

On December 10, 2009, the Nielsen Company announced that it would sell its
Business Media division, which included brands such as _Adweek_ , _Billboard_
, and _The Hollywood Reporter_ , to a new company known as e5 Global Media; a
joint venture between Guggenheim Partners and Pluribus Capital Management—a
company led by James Finkelstein, Matthew Doull, and George Green. Two Nielsen
properties, _Editor& Publisher_, and _Kirkus Reviews_ , were not included in
the sale, and were to be shut down.[1] _Editor & Publisher_ would instead be
sold to the Duncan McIntosh Company,[2] and _Kirkus Reviews_ would be sold to
Herbert Simon.[3] The company's first CEO was Richard Beckman,[4] previously
an executive and publisher at Condé Nast and Fairchild Publications,[5] and
former publisher of magazines _GQ_ and _Vogue_.[6] Beckman's career suffered a
setback in 1999 following "some inappropriate behavior" resulting in injuries
to _Vogue_ 's West Coast advertising director Carol Matthews, while Beckman
was Matthews' publisher at Condé Nast.[7]

Beckman's first major move was a re-launch of _The Hollywood Reporter_ ; with
the hiring of Janice Min, formerly of _Us Weekly_ , as editorial director,
_THR_ replaced its daily print publication with a weekly magazine, and
performed a significant redesign to its website with an increased focus on
breaking scoops. The new format was meant to compete against up-and-coming
blogs focusing on industry news, such as _Deadline Hollywood_ and _TheWrap_ ,
along with its then-struggling rival _Variety_. The changes had a significant
impact on the publication's performance: by 2013, ad sales were up more than
50%, while traffic to the magazine's website had grown by 800%.[8][9] In
October 2010, the company was renamed Prometheus Global Media; named after the
Greek mythological figure, Beckman stated in an internal memo that the new
name would "[carry] more weight and gravitas in the marketplace."[10]

In late 2011, Prometheus went through a number of cost-cutting measures. In
August 2011, _Backstage_ was sold to a group of investors led by John Amato in
a transaction funded by Guggenheim, and the following month, Prometheus laid
off the staff responsible for the _Hollywood Creative Directory_ and announced
it had sold the publication.[11][12][13]

In January 2013, Guggenheim Partners acquired the stake in Prometheus owned by
Pluribus Capital, giving it full ownership; following the acquisition, former
Yahoo! executive Ross Levinsohn was named as CEO of the new Guggenheim Digital
Media division, which would oversee Prometheus and other digital assets for
Guggenheim companies (such as Dick Clark Productions). In April 2013,
Guggenheim re-acquired _Backstage_ (which had also acquired Sonicbids, a
platform for allowing musicians to book gigs online) and made its CEO John
Amato president of the Billboard Group—a new group consisting of _Billboard_ ,
_Backstage_ , and Sonicbids.[14][15][16][17]

In a January 2014 restructuring, Levinsohn was shifted to a business
development role and no longer directly manages the Prometheus properties.
Additionally, the company was split into two operating groups; an
Entertainment Group was formed by merging _The Hollywood Reporter_ into the
Billboard Group, with Janice Min becoming co-president and chief creative
officer of the group alongside Amato. The remaining properties, consisting of
_Adweek_ and Film Expo Group, are led by Jeff Wilbur.[15][18]

On May 29, 2014, Prometheus announced it would acquire the publishing assets
of Mediabistro—a network of websites focusing on various aspects of the mass
media industry—which includes the media job listing site _Mediabistro_ and its
network of blogs such as _AgencySpy_ , _FishbowlNY_ , _Lost Remote_ and
_TVNewser_ —for $8 million. The acquisition did not include Mediabistro's expo
business, which were retained under the name Mecklermedia.[19][20] On January
13, 2015, _Adweek_ and Film Expo Group were merged into Mediabistro to form a
new Prometheus subsidiary, Mediabistro Holdings. At the same time, its blogs
were re-launched under the new "Adweek Blog Network" banner, and all of
Mediabistro's social media-oriented blogs were merged into _SocialTimes_.[21]

In March 2015, Guggenheim Partners reported that its president Todd Boehly was
exploring the possibility of forming his own company. A representative stated
that such a company would "likely be harmonious with Guggenheim, especially
since Todd's role for some time has been strategic and transaction-oriented,
rather than working in or managing any of our day-to-day businesses."[22] On
December 17, 2015, in response to losses across Guggenheim Partners, the
company announced that it would spin out its media properties to a group led
by Boehly, including the Hollywood Reporter-Billboard Media Group,
Mediabistro, and Dick Clark Productions, all under their existing
leadership.[23][24][25] The resultant company is known as Eldridge
Industries.[26]

