**Radio Philippines Network, Inc. (RPN)** is a Filipino-based television and
radio company based in Quezon City. It is the flagship media property of Nine
Media Corporation of the ALC Group of Companies; along with the Presidential
Communications Operations Office (PCOO), and Far East Managers and Investors
Inc., owned by the family of company founder Roberto Benedicto, among others,
as major shareholders. The network's main offices and transmitter is located
at Panay Avenue, Brgy. South Triangle also in Quezon City. Founded by Roberto
Benedicto and prior to the privatization, it was the sister station of current
government owned and controlled Intercontinental Broadcasting Corporation.
RPN, along with sister media companies People's Television Network and
Philippine Broadcasting Service, forms the media arm of the PCOO.

Radio Philippines Network operates television stations with airtime being
leased by its parent Nine Media, serving as primary broadcasters of **CNN
Philippines** , a local franchise of the Cable News Network. RPN also operates
regional AM radio stations under the brand **Radyo Ronda** , serving as
partial affiliate of sister station DWIZ in Metro Manila.

The Congress of the Philippines approved the franchise of Radio Philippines
Network on June 29, 1960. Instead of using its franchise name, the network
instead first used Kanlaon Broadcasting System as its initial branding.
Kanlaon is a volcano on the Philippine island of Negros, the home of its
founder Roberto Benedicto. Kanlaon Broadcasting System started broadcasting as
a radio network with its first station DZBI in Manila. By 1967, KBS had
metamorphosed into a full network, with seven radio stations all over the
country namely, DZRR and DZAX in Manila, DZAH and DZBS in Baguio, DZTG in
Tuguegarao, DZRL in Laoag (later moved to Batac), and DXDX in Dadiangas.
Philippine radio veteran Ben Aniceto was the operations director at the
time.[2]

The broadcast network ventured into television broadcasting on October 15,
1969 with the launch of KBS-9 Manila as the network's flagship TV station.[3]
KBS-12 Baguio also signed on the air on the same year. Properties and funding
for the nascent TV network partly came from ABS-CBN in the form of its old
headquarters along Roxas Boulevard and equipment from Toshiba enabling them to
broadcast in color. As a result, on its launch it was branded _Accucolor 9 -
an RPN station_ ("Accucolor" is the name of the color technology used) as the
first Philippine television network to launch in full color.

In 1970, KBS also acquired a Color-ready Outside Broadcast Van for the remote
broadcasts of major news events and sports coverages. It was also in the same
year when KBS pioneered newscasting on television as they launched the first
ever newspaper-format nightly newscast titled _NewsWatch_. Back then,
broadcast hours were limited to late afternoons up to around midnight; except
for Sundays, when the channel begins transmissions after midday.

In 1971, KBS firmly established as an all-color television network, consisting
of four full powered provincial stations, strategically situated in Baguio
(KBS-12), Bicol (KBS-10 in Iriga), Bacolod (KBS-8), and Cebu (KBS-9 in
Mandaue), alongside the flagship station (KBS-9) in Manila, with plans to
expand southward into Mindanao at that time.

On September 1972, the KBS television and radio stations, and its sister
publication _Daily Express_ under the Benedicto group were allowed to operate
during the martial law period, where most of the media outfits were closed
down. Color production with color-ready equipment would enable the government
to invest in RPN for color coverages of national events, as then state network
GTV (now PTV), which began two years later after the beginning of martial law,
was mostly monochrome before its first color broadcasts in 1976.

In 1975, KBS formally relaunched as RPN, the acronym for its franchise name,
Radio Philippines Network (the RPN name was first used in the provincial
stations before the RPN brand would later be used for the Manila station as
well; the KBS name was also used for other aspects such as KBS Sports until
1986). The network covered special events such as the Olympic Games (it is
also the first sporting coverage to broadcast in full color), Thrilla in
Manila in 1975; and also became the official broadcaster for the Miss Universe
pageant held in Manila in 1974; and programs such as _John En Marsha_ (which
both the media and academe regarded the show as the paradigm of development
communication), _Flordeluna_ and _Superstar_ (formerly known as _The Nora
Aunor-Eddie Peregrina Show_ ). RPN became the birthplace and the first humble
abode of the now longest running daytime variety show _Eat Bulaga!_
(premiering in 1979); as well as the longest running game show on Philippine
television _Family Kuarta o Kahon_ hosted by Pepe Pimentel (originally aired
on ABS-CBN then BBC-2); which it aired for almost 38 years, until it finally
folded up during the year 2000. The network also pioneered the use of computer
graphics for their program plugs and station IDs, as well as for the
broadcasts of its easily recognizable digital clock embedded on the lower left
part of the screen during the entire broadcast day except for newscasts,
commercials, continuity plugs, station ID, and during sign-off; eventually
becoming the centerpiece of the network's broadcasts for 32 years (starting in
1975), until it was abandoned in 2007; and after the fire that razed its first
studios on June 6, 1973, RPN moved to the Broadcast Plaza (now ABS-CBN
Broadcasting Center) in the same year, and to its current Broadcast City home
in July 1978, alongside sister networks BBC and IBC.

RPN also aired anime programming (making them one of the first to do so in the
country) and imported and syndicated programs from the United States. RPN is
the first network to cover the Philippine Basketball Association games live in
1976, before the broadcasts moved on to BBC.

On January 16, 1980, RPN began to broadcast primetime programs through its new
domestic satellite technology (DOMSAT) in which the 1980s logo resembles a
satellite antenna.[4] On May 18, 1982, _Eat Bulaga!_ was also included to the
list of the network's DOMSAT-simulcast programs. This made RPN the first
national network to achieve nationwide program simulcasting via satellite.

The network also became home to, from 1978 up to the early 1980s, the Super
Sentai series (making it the first in the Philippines to do so, becoming a
pioneer in broadcasting tokusatsu and sentai programs in the country in the
process). These made it a reason for the network in 1982 to adopt _The Leader_
as its official slogan, coupled with its Number 9 and the red corporate logos
(the latter which is still the current logo of the network up to this day),
due to its massive successes as the nation's number one network. In 1986,
after the assumption of office of President Corazon Aquino, the government
sequestered Radio Philippines Network for allegedly being part of the crony
capitalism under the Marcos regime. By then, it was the leading network in the
Philippines cornering the highest audience share in the entire country.

After the People Power Revolution, the stock and assets of RPN, IBC and
Banahaw Broadcasting Corporation were sequestered by the Presidential
Commission on Good Government (PCGG). President Corazon Aquino awarded BBC's
Channel 2 frequency and its affiliates, through an executive order, to ABS-
CBN, and RPN's and IBC's assets were turned over to the Government
Communications Group.

The period saw a major decline for RPN as its resources became outdated and
endured major mismanagement which led to the network either shutting down or
selling its stations. From being number 1 in the ratings, RPN's ratings
slumped, due to the growth of GMA Radio-Television Arts and PTV, and more
importantly as a result of ABS-CBN's meteoric rise to the number 1 spot in
1988.

During the post-EDSA Revolution era, RPN launched the first Filipino-created
animated series, Ang Panday. By 1989, some of RPN's programming such as _John
en Marsha_ and _Superstar_ were cancelled, and TAPE Inc.'s daytime programs
_Eat Bulaga!_ , _Agila_ and _Coney Reyes on Camera_ (a co-production with
Coney Reyes' CAN Television) moved under a co-production agreement to ABS-CBN,
as they saw the resurgent network as a vital element in the sustaining of the
three shows' success. By then, the once-dominant RPN had fallen to 4th place,
trailing far behind ABS-CBN and GMA and locked in a losing battle with PTV for
3rd place.

In 1989, RPN was renamed as New Vision 9 to recoup lost audience share in the
ratings game of  Philippine television networks. At the same year, New Vision
9 transmitter's effective radiated power was increased to 1 million watts,
ensuing clearer and better signal reception in the Greater Luzon Area. The
rebrand was took place after RPN and Syndicated Media Access Corporation
(SMAC) took over the network's management and marketing. The rebranding,
although it proved futile in the turnaround of RPN's ratings, did make history
for the network as it pioneered 24-hour television broadcasting in the
Philippines. During the latter part of the "New Vision 9" period, its ratings
further suffered at last place in primetime (behind ABS-CBN, GMA, ABC, IBC,
and PTV). Worse yet, RPN's nationwide reach suffered as well as its TV network
- largely due to continued financial turmoil - shrunk from 19 TV stations by
1989 to just eight by 1994.

By then, RPN not only had to deal with the continued dominance of ABS-CBN and
GMA, but also the return of another station shut down during martial law, ABC,
and the onset of cable and UHF channels which started to eat up the audience
shares of the least-watched networks.

In 1994, New Vision 9 was renamed back as Radio Philippines Network (RPN) and
in the same year, RPN became the second VHF television network in the
Philippines to broadcast in full surround stereo (after GMA Network introduced
StereoVision in 1987). Following this, RPN managed to recover in primetime
ratings, from dead last in 1994 to fifth place in 1995, beating PTV (which by
then suffered a major blow after losing the rights to one of its top-raters,
the PBA games, to IBC). This, along with it being number 3 in daytime ratings,
helped RPN to challenge ABC for third place in total day ratings.

In 1996, the network quickly regained its foothold when it began to broadcast
a Tagalog dub of the Mexican telenovela _Marimar_ , which turned out to be a
phenomenal success, and discombobulating the competition for some time.

The network became the driving force in Tagalog-dubbed foreign programs and
movies and made the popular and turnaround its ratings on the evening prime
time. Due to the success, the other networks followed and broadcast
telenovelas not only from Mexico but also Spanish language telenovelas from
the United States, Colombia (GMA 7's _Betty La Fea_ ), Venezuela (GMA 7's
_Samantha_ and _All My Love_ ) and Argentina (GMA 7's _Monica Brava_ ) and
eventually even drama series from Brazil (ABS-CBN's _Ana Manuela_ ) and Asian
drama series from Taiwan (notably _Meteor Garden_ ) and South Korea (notably
_Bright Girl_ ). The network also became the home of the cream of the crop
amongst the English language television programs around the world; with its
strong primetime programming line-up.

This lineup helped RPN maintain its overall 4th place standing in the ratings
during the latter half of the 90s, despite later facing competition with UHF
stations such as ABS-CBN's Studio 23, which offered more canned programs
compared to most VHF stations. In 1999, RPN slid again to fifth place behind
ABC, but managed to recover its 4th place standing the following year,
sustaining it for the next two years.

By mid-2000s, a major network war in the ratings game ensued with the
broadcast of Taiwanese/Korean-language television series (which kicked off
with ABS-CBN's broadcast of Taiwanese Meteor Garden) by the two superior
leading networks, ABS-CBN and GMA Network, causing RPN into decline in the
telenovelas battle.

RPN renewed its congressional franchise for another 25 years on February 19,
2004. Under Philippine law, no broadcast company will operate without
franchise from the Philippine congress, an authority that limits and regulates
operations of telecommunications and broadcast media such as televisions and
radios. It was also in the same year when the network launched its primetime
block, dubbed as _The Prime Shift_ , blocktimed by Solar Entertainment
Corporation. The said programming block lasted until 2006.

On March 11, 2007, after its initial tieup with _The Prime Shift_ block, RPN
announced a partnership with Solar Entertainment Corporation, an operator of a
number of cable channels in the country. The company began co-producing new
programming for the network, such as a local version of the _Top Model_
franchise. The network underwent management changes on December 24, 2007, as
Tonypet Albano (undersecretary and executive director of Malacañang's Office
of Political Coalition Affairs and Deputy Spokesperson of TEAM Unity, now
Vice-Governor of Isabela) was appointed chairman of the network (replacing
Education Undersecretary Mona Valisno, incumbent Presidential Assistant for
Education). Undersecretary Robert Rivera was appointed director of the board,
while the president and chief executive officer became former senator Orlando
"Orly" Mercado.[5]

Mercado's first major move was to expand their partnerships with Solar
Entertainment. Programming from Solar's cable network C/S was added to RPN's
lineup at the beginning of the new year, and PBA basketball would also return
to the network beginning in the 2008-09 season, as part of Solar Sports' new
three-year deal with the league after an intense bidding war with ABS-
CBN.[6][7]

In October 2008, RPN's stations ultimately took on the C/S name as part of
their permanent branding, and rebranded itself as C/S 9. The C/S 9 name would
not last, on November 29, 2009, the network re-branded again under the new
name Solar TV. In late 2010, it was revealed that RPN would no longer carry
PBA games, due to planned re-launch to occur in 2011, with more "feminine"
programming.[8]

In 2010, the Philippine government began to actively consider privatizing RPN
and IBC. Ricardo Abcede, member of the Presidential Commission on Good
Government, supported the plans, noting that the government should not need to
subsidize three state broadcasters when most countries only have one, and
could gain a significant profit if they were sold to a major company willing
to invest in the stations.[9]

In January 2011, reports confirmed that Solar Entertainment Corporation,
through Solar TV Network, and Roberto Benedicto's daughter Kitchie Benedicto
now owned a 34% minority share in RPN.[10] Presidential Communications
Operations Office (PCOO) secretary Herminio Coloma, Jr. also began to hold
meetings with the network's employees union to discuss the financial state of
RPN as part of the planned privatization.[11] On February 22, 2011, RPN's
employees filed a strike notice, protesting a rumored shutdown of RPN on
February 25, and accusing the government of attempting to privatize RPN
without actively consulting its employees.[11][12][13]

On February 25, 2011, RPN signed off temporarily in preparation for a relaunch
as ETC on March 2, 2011.[14][15] Additional shares in RPN were sold to Far
East Managers and Investors Inc. (FEMI), an organization company affiliated
with Ambassador Roberto Benedicto (founder of RPN), and the San Miguel
Corporation. The government would retain the People's Television Network to
serve as the sole state broadcaster of the country.[16][17] However, due to
privatization, RPN is forced to retrench 200 employees and stopping the
production of RPN NewsWatch, its last RPN-produced program, on October 29,
2012 as Solar TV takes over the entire RPN's airtime.[18][19]

In November 2013, San Miguel Corporation President and COO Ramon S. Ang
declares interest in acquiring Solar Television Network and its stake on RPN
but instead acquire a minority stake of the network.[20]

On November 30, 2013, ETC returned to SBN while Solar News Channel moved to
RPN since the following day to widen its nationwide telecast.[21][22][23] (SBN
broadcasts ETC from 2008-2011)

On January 3, 2014, RPN and Aliw Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) signed a
memorandum of agreement for the expanded coverage of the both TV and radio
networks nationwide. Selected DWIZ programs will be simulcast on the Radyo
Ronda Network.[24][25]

On August 20, 2014, Solar Entertainment Corporation chief Wilson Tieng
announced that he ceded his entire share on Solar TV Network, Inc., including
its 34% majority share on RPN, to Antonio Cabangon Chua (he died almost 2
years later on March 11, 2016), owner of business daily _BusinessMirror_ and
Aliw Broadcasting Corporation.[26][27] Tieng sold Solar TV because they are
losing money for operations and he will be focusing instead on the remaining
television channels he personally owned through Solar Entertainment
Corporation.

To reflect the change of ownership, on August 13, 2014, Solar Television
Network and RPN announced the rebranding of Solar News Channel into 9TV by
August 23, dropping the "Solar" branding.[28][29] 9TV retained the news and
current affairs programming while expanding its weekend programming to cater
more audiences with the launching of "Kids Weekend", "Small Acts, Big
Stories", "Something to Chew On" and "Boys Ride Out".[30]

However, the 9TV branding is only a transitional brand to separate "what is
Tieng's (the former owner) and what is Cabangon-Chua's". In October 14, 2014,
Nine Media Corporation (formerly Solar Television Network) inked a 5-year
brand licensing agreement with the Turner Broadcasting System to rebrand 9TV
into CNN Philippines, the local franchise of Cable News Network, and the third
local CNN channel in Asia (after CNN Indonesia and India's CNN-IBN). CNN
Philippines was officially launched on March 16, 2015.[31]

On March 16, 2015, 9TV started broadcasting on CNN Philippines brand.[32] CNN
Philippines is the seventh rebrand of Radio Philippines Network since its
inception as KBS. It dropped the transitional brand 9TV after seven months of
operations under such brand. The new brand reflects the CNN format of news
reporting on news from the Philippines.

