**RAF Northolt** (IATA: **NHT** , ICAO: **EGWU** ) is a Royal Air Force
station in South Ruislip, 2 nautical miles (3.7 km; 2.3 mi)[3] from Uxbridge
in the London Borough of Hillingdon, west London, England, approximately 6 mi
(10 km) north of London Heathrow Airport. The station handles many private
civil flights in addition to Air Force flights.[4] Northolt has one runway in
operation, spanning 1,687 m × 46 m (5,535 ft × 151 ft), with a grooved asphalt
surface.[3]

Northolt pre-dates the establishment of the Royal Air Force by almost three
years, having opened in May 1915, making it the oldest RAF base. Originally
established for the Royal Flying Corps, it has the longest history of
continuous use of any RAF airfield. Before the outbreak of the Second World
War, the station was the first to take delivery of the Hawker Hurricane. The
station played a key role during the Battle of Britain, when fighters from
several of its units, including No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron, engaged enemy
aircraft as part of the defence of London. It became the first base to have
squadrons operating Supermarine Spitfire aircraft within German airspace.

During the construction of Heathrow Airport, Northolt was used for commercial
civil flights, becoming the busiest airport in Europe for a time and a major
base for British European Airways. More recently the station has become the
hub of British military flying operations in the London area. Northolt has
been extensively redeveloped since 2006 to accommodate these changes, becoming
home to the British Forces Post Office, which moved to a newly constructed
headquarters and sorting office on the site. Units currently based at RAF
Northolt are No. 32 (The Royal) Squadron, the Queen's Colour Squadron, 600
(City of London) Squadron, No 1 Aeronautical Information Documents Unit, the
Air Historical Branch and the Central Band of the RAF.

Following Louis Blériot's first flight across the English Channel in 1909, the
British Army considered the necessity of defending the United Kingdom from a
future air attack. By May 1910, Claude Grahame-White and other aviation
pioneers were flying from the flat areas around Ruislip, although they soon
sought an aerodrome for London, which was eventually built at Hendon. A
proposal was made in 1912 for the area around where RAF Northolt now stands to
be developed as "Harrow Aerodrome". The company established to develop the
site was listed on the London Stock Exchange but the idea did not progress any
further.[5]

The outbreak of the First World War necessitated a new aerodrome for the Royal
Flying Corps. The Corps had received the Royal Warrant on 13 April 1912,
whereupon Major Sefton Brancker of the War Office conducted aerial surveys in
1914 of Glebe Farm in Ickenham, and Hundred Acres Farm and Down Barnes Farm in
Ruislip, looking for the most effective operating base for new squadrons. He
settled on a site near Northolt Junction railway station; in January 1915 the
government requisitioned the land. It is rumoured that the government official
tasked with acquiring the land arrived at the site with his map upside down,
leading to the government requisitioning and developing land on the wrong side
of the railway line,[6] including the old Hill Farm.[7]

Construction of the new aerodrome, to be named "RFC Military School, Ruislip",
began in January 1915. It opened on 3 May 1915, becoming known as Northolt and
home to No. 4 Reserve Aeroplane Squadron which relocated from Farnborough.
Most early RAF airfields were named after the nearest railway station, in this
case Northolt Junction, later named Northolt Halt and now South Ruislip
station; so the airfield became "Northolt" despite being in neighbouring South
Ruislip. In the same year the airfield was extended westwards, and aircraft
began flying sorties in defence of London against Zeppelin raids. No. 18
Squadron was formed in the same month as Northolt and equipped with Bleriot
Experimental biplanes, whose slow speed led to heavy losses in combat with the
German Fliegertruppe.[6]

In 1916, No. 43 Squadron was formed under the command of Major Sholto Douglas.
Aircraft equipping the squadron included the Sopwith 1½ Strutter, built by the
Fairey Aviation company, then in Hayes. The Strutter made its first test
flight from Northolt in 1916 with Harry Hawker at the controls.[8] Fairey
conducted test flights at Northolt from 1917 until 1928 when the Air Ministry
gave the company notice to vacate the aerodrome.[9] Flights later resumed from
the Great West Aerodrome owned by Fairey in Harmondsworth, which was
eventually developed as Heathrow Airport.[10] No. 43 Squadron went on to fly
sorties over France from 17 January 1917, taking part in the Battle of Vimy
Ridge between 4 and 8 April 1917.[11]

No. 600 Squadron and No. 601 Squadron of the fledgling Royal Auxiliary Air
Force were formed at Northolt in 1925 under the command of Squadron Leader
Lord Edward Grosvenor. Both squadrons were deployed to RAF Hendon in 1927,
although 600 Squadron returned in 1939. The Prince of Wales, later King Edward
VIII and subsequently the Duke of Windsor, made his first flight in a Bristol
F.2 Fighter from Northolt on 27 April 1929.[12]

Northolt became an active base during the Second World War for Royal Air Force
and Polish Air Force squadrons in their defence of the United Kingdom. It was
the first RAF station to operate the Hawker Hurricane, with No. 111 Squadron
receiving the first four aircraft in December 1937,[13] and reaching its full
complement by February 1938.[14] In the lead-up to war, the RAF implemented a
policy of adding concrete runways to important airfields; by 1939 Northolt had
a new 800-by-50-yard (732 by 46 m) concrete runway.[15] Later in 1939 RAF
Hendon became one of its satellite airfields.[16] Polish pilots were taught
English at RAF Uxbridge, where they also practised formation flying using
tricycles with radios, compasses and speed indicators.[17]

On 15 September 1940 during the Battle of Britain, No. 1 Squadron RCAF, No.
229 Squadron, No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron, No. 504 Squadron, and part of
No. 264 Squadron were based at the station, all under the control of No. 11
Group RAF, headquartered at RAF Uxbridge.[14] All flew Hawker Hurricanes
except No. 264 Squadron's contingent, which operated the Boulton Paul Defiant.
During the Battle of Britain, the Polish Squadron shot down the greatest
number of enemy aircraft, with its Czech pilot Sergeant Josef František
scoring the most "kills".[13] The Luftwaffe bombed the airfield in August 1940
as well as other sector airfields in the area, including Biggin Hill,
Hornchurch and North Weald, as part of a concentrated effort against the
airfields and sector stations of No. 11 Group RAF.[14] A total of 4,000 bombs
were recorded as falling within two miles (3 km) of the airfield over a
fifteen-month period, although only two were recorded as hitting the airfield
itself.[18] Under the leadership of the station commander, Group Captain
Stanley Vincent, the airfield was camouflaged to resemble civil housing.
Vincent had been concerned that camouflaging the airfield as open land would
look too suspicious from the air; Northolt was surrounded by housing and so a
large open area would draw attention. A fake stream was painted across the
main runway while the hangars were decorated to look like houses and
gardens.[19] The result was so effective that pilots flying to Northolt from
other airfields often struggled to find it.[20]

Thirty Allied airmen including servicemen from Belgium, Canada,
Czechoslovakia, New Zealand, Poland and the United Kingdom were killed flying
from RAF Northolt during the Battle of Britain, of whom ten were Polish.[21]
The Polish War Memorial dedicated to all Polish airmen who lost their lives
during the Second World War, stands near the southeastern corner of the
airfield. Its name is also commemorated at the adjacent eponymous junction on
Western Avenue.[22]

Squadrons based at RAF Northolt during the battle shot down a total of 148
Luftwaffe aircraft and damaged 52. A further 25 were claimed by pilots and
recorded as "probables".[23] Group Captain Vincent became one of the few RAF
airmen to shoot down an enemy aircraft in both World Wars. He was a long-
serving RAF man who had claimed an aerial victory over the Western Front in
the First World War. By the time of the Battle of Britain he was too old for
operational flying. Nevertheless, he took to the skies during one raid and
brought down a German aircraft.[24]

After the Battle of Britain, the station remained a base for daytime fighter
operations, with No. 302 Polish Fighter Squadron, No. 229 Squadron and No. 615
Squadron all arriving before 3 November 1940. No. 308 Polish Fighter Squadron
and No. 306 Polish Fighter Squadron later joined No. 303 during 1941 to form
the No. 1 Polish Fighter Wing. Polish Fighter Squadrons based at Northolt in
1942 took part in Operation Jubilee (the raid on Dieppe) on 19 August
alongside Nos. 302 and 308 from nearby RAF Heston. Reconnaissance squadrons
No. 16 Squadron and No. 140 Squadron operating Supermarine Spitfires and de
Havilland Mosquitos moved to Northolt in 1944. No. 69 Squadron with their
Vickers Wellingtons modified for photographic reconnaissance arrived later.
All three reconnaissance squadrons were combined to form No. 34 (PR) Wing.[25]

In 1943, the station became the first to fly sorties using Supermarine
Spitfires (Mk IXs) in German airspace in support of bomber operations.[26] On
25 March, RAF Ferry Command became RAF Transport Command and thereafter used
Northolt as a London base for the transfer of new aircraft from factories to
airfields. Runway 26/08 was extended in February that year to accommodate the
larger transport aircraft required by the Command. Northolt continued as a
Sector Fighter Station until February 1944. As a result of this and the new
larger runway, the smaller 02/20 runway closed in April 1944.[27]

RAF Northolt became home to Prime Minister Winston Churchill's personal
aircraft, a modified Douglas C-54 Skymaster, in June 1944. The aircraft was
used to fly him to meetings with other Allied leaders.[28] Between 20 and 21
July 1944, a converted Consolidated B-24 Liberator bomber named "Marco Polo"
made the first non-stop intercontinental flight, flying from London to
Washington, DC, then returning to Northolt from La Guardia Airport within 18
hours. In November of the same year, an Avro York flew non-stop from Northolt
to Cairo in 10 hours and 25 minutes. A new runway, 31/13, was surveyed the
following month and built in March 1946.[29]

Starting in 1946 the airfield was used by civil aviation during the
construction of nearby Heathrow Airport.[13] During this period, Northolt
became a major base for British European Airways, which used the nearby Bourne
School as its headquarters.[30] Other airlines including Aer Lingus, Alitalia,
Scandinavian Airlines System and Swissair used the airfield for scheduled
services across Europe.[30]

In December 1946, after taking off during a heavy snowstorm, a Douglas Dakota
3 operated by Railway Air Services, flying from Northolt to Glasgow, crashed
onto the roof of a house in South Ruislip. All the crew and passengers escaped
unharmed by climbing through the loft of the house and leaving via the front
door.[31] No residents were injured, even though the owner of the house next
door was standing at her front gate when the aircraft came down. The owners of
the house had not moved in at the time of the crash as they were due to be
married a few days later. The house was later named "Dakota Rest", and still
stands today.[32]

During 1952 a total of 50,000 air movements were recorded, making the airfield
the busiest in Europe.[26] By then the only scheduled airlines were BEA and
Aer Lingus. The RAF maintained a presence throughout its use by civil
airlines, making it the longest continuously used airfield in the history of
the Royal Air Force.[31] En route from Northolt to Dublin, on 10 January 1952,
a civil Douglas C-47 Skytrain operated by Aer Lingus and named "St. Kevin"
flew into an area of extreme turbulence caused by a mountain wave generated by
Snowdon. As a result, the plane crashed into a peat bog near Llyn Gwynant in
Snowdonia, killing all 20 passengers and three crew in the company's first
fatal accident.[33]

Civil flights ceased when the central area at Heathrow opened in 1954 with
Northolt reverting to sole military use in May that year.[34] Northolt's
operations became constrained by its proximity to the new much larger civil
airport at Heathrow.[35] No. 1 Aeronautical Information Documents Unit (AIDU)
moved to the station in 1956 from the neighbouring RAF West Ruislip
station.[13] The unit had been established in 1953 to provide information on
airfields, communications and navigational aids for the benefit of aircraft
safety. AIDU was originally under the command of RAF Transport Command but
this was moved to Home Command in March 1957.[36]

On 1 June 1960, an Avro Anson aircraft suffered engine failure soon after
take-off from Northolt and crash-landed on top of the nearby Express Dairies
plant in South Ruislip. There were no fatalities.[35] Later that year, on 25
October, a Pan Am Boeing 707, heading for Heathrow, mistakenly landed at
Northolt with forty-one passengers on board.[37][38] A Lufthansa Boeing 707
also attempted to land at the station on 28 April 1964 but was dissuaded by a
red signal flare fired by personnel from Air Traffic Control. In the days
before navigational aids such as instrument landing systems (ILS) and the
global positioning system (GPS) were available, the letters _NO_ (for
Northolt) and _LH_ (for Heathrow) were painted on two gasometers on the
approach to each airfield, one at Southall for the approach to Heathrow's
diagonal runway (coded 23L) and one at South Harrow for the approach to
Northolt's runway (then coded 26), in an effort to prevent a recurrence of
such errors.[35] By the 1980s movements of privately owned aircraft, mainly
corporate jets, outnumbered military aircraft. Civil flights were limited to
28 per day,[39] with a maximum of 7,000 a year. This limit remained in force
in 2008.[40]

Northolt received its first gate guardian, a Spitfire F.Mk 22, in September
1963. Purchased from the RAF in 1969 for use in the film _Battle of Britain_ ,
it was replaced by a Spitfire Mk XVI on 2 June 1970. This aircraft remained at
the station until its removal on 8 September 1989 for restoration to full
flying condition. The Kermit Weeks' Fantasy of Flight Museum in Polk City,
Florida, purchased the aircraft whereupon the station received a fibreglass
replica of a Spitfire Mk IX as a replacement.[41]

Servicing of No. 32 Squadron passed from the RAF to the private company Fields
Aviation Services in April 1985, then to Lovaux Aircraft Servicing in 1990. In
1991, the Station Flight was established, taking delivery of two Britten-
Norman Islanders in December which entered service in January 1992.[42] No. 32
Squadron celebrated its Diamond Jubilee in 1991, at a time when personnel
became involved in operations during the Gulf War. No. 38 Group RAF assumed
control of RAF Northolt on 2 November 1992 following a wider restructuring of
the RAF. On 16 December 1994, the new southside Operations Building opened,
replacing the old Northolt Airport Terminal building. With the reorganisation
of RAF Strike Command on 1 April 2000, No. 38 Group was disbanded and Northolt
came under the control of No. 2 Group RAF.[43]

In August 1996, a Spanish Learjet operated by Mar Aviation overshot runway 25
and collided with a van heading eastward on the A40 Western Avenue; the
aircraft was carrying an actress bound for Pinewood Studios in
Buckinghamshire. The two pilots, the actress and van driver all suffered minor
injuries.[44] The ensuing investigation by the Civil Aviation Authority's Air
Accidents Investigation Branch found that both the crew's lack of
understanding English and military air traffic control procedures had
contributed significantly to the crash. Subsequently, after some thirty years
of protracted consideration, an ILS was eventually fitted to Northolt's
redefined Runway 25. In addition, aggregate-filled safety pits were installed
at each end of the runway by 21 January 1998 to protect road users in the
event of another business jet or military transport failing to stop or ascend
before the end of the runway.[45] The House of Commons Transport Select
Committee considered the conversion of RAF Northolt to a possible offshoot of
Heathrow Airport in the 1990s. While the existing runways would cause aircraft
to cross the flight paths of those using Heathrow, new parallel runways were
suggested.[46] These suggestions were opposed by then MP for Ruislip-
Northwood, John Wilkinson, and eventually progressed no further.[47]

Much media attention focused on the airfield when the body of Diana, Princess
of Wales, arrived there from Villacoublay airfield, in Paris, France, after
her death in a car crash in the city on 31 August 1997.[48] The Queen's Colour
Squadron, then based at neighbouring RAF Uxbridge, acted as the bearer party,
while the flight was met by the Prime Minister, the Lord Chamberlain, Lord
Lieutenant of Greater London, Secretary of State for Defence, the RAF Northolt
station commander and the RAF Chaplain-in-Chief.[49]

Attention was high again in 2001 when Ronnie Biggs, the seriously ill,
fugitive Great Train Robber, was flown from Brazil to the airfield to be
arrested by waiting police officers. Biggs had escaped from custody in 1965;
upon his return he was taken to Belmarsh Prison to complete the remainder of
his sentence.[50]

Since 1 June 1998, station commanders have served as aides-de-camp to the
Queen.[51] The station received the Freedom of Entry to the London Borough of
Hillingdon on 11 May 2000. This allowed military personnel to march through
the borough in full uniform, an honour granted by the council in light of 2000
being the 60th anniversary of the Battle of Britain and the 85th anniversary
of the opening of RAF Northolt. The neighbouring RAF Uxbridge station had
received the same honour in 1960.[52]

The remains of a Hawker Hurricane flown by Flying Officer Ludwik Witold
Paszkiewicz, the first pilot in No. 303 Squadron to shoot down an enemy
aircraft, were donated to the station in June 2008. During the Battle of
Britain, Paszkiewicz became a flying ace and received the Distinguished Flying
Cross after shooting down six aircraft. He was killed in action over Borough
Green in Kent on 27 September 1940.[53] No. 303 Squadron recorded its 100th
kill less than a month after commencing operations.[54] Polish pilot Squadron
Leader Franciszek Kornicki, who saw wartime service at RAF Northolt, was
reunited with the Supermarine Spitfire he had flown at a special ceremony in
September 2010.[55]

An additional memorial to British, Polish, Australian and New Zealand aircrew
killed during the Battle of Britain was unveiled in September 2010.[56] In
October that year, the hangar which had housed Churchill's personal aircraft,
the former Squadron Watch office, and the Operations Block were given Grade II
listed building status.[57] The Operations Block was a prototype of the
"Dowding System", which facilitated the chain of command's issuance of orders
for the interception of enemy aircraft and a scheme used for the first time
during the Battle of Britain. Prior to the listing, the block was renamed the
Sir Keith Park Building on 20 September in honour of the former No. 11 Group
RAF commander who had also served as station commander at Northolt between
1931 and 1932.[58] RAF Northolt is the only airfield used in the Battle of
Britain still operated by the RAF.[59]

In January 2012 it was reported that the future of the station was under
review by the Ministry of Defence as part of efforts to reduce defence
spending.[60] A proposed use has been as a satellite of Heathrow Airport,
although a Ministry of Defence spokesman described that as unlikely.[61]

Four Eurofighter Typhoon aircraft arrived at the station from RAF Coningsby on
2 May 2012 to take part in a security exercise as part of preparations for the
2012 Summer Olympics. During the Games, the aircraft were deployed to the
station to provide air superiority protection for London, in conjunction with
other security measures by the British Armed Forces. Westland Sea King
helicopters of the Royal Navy were also deployed to the station.[62] The
presence of the aircraft during the Olympics became the first time fighter
aircraft had been stationed at RAF Northolt since the Second World War.[63]
The Typhoons and Sea Kings left Northolt on 16 August following the conclusion
of the Olympics.[64]

The overnight base of the London Air Ambulance moved to RAF Northolt from
Denham Aerodrome in February 2013.[65] The flying time from the station to its
daytime base at the Royal London Hospital in Whitechapel is three minutes
shorter than from Denham, which also provides savings for the Air Ambulance
charity.[66]

In April 2013 the Ministry of Defence announced a proposal to increase the
number of private flights from 7,000 to 12,000 per year as part of plans to
increase the income generated by the airfield. The number of flights would be
limited to 40 per day, and the increase would be phased in over three years to
2016.[67]

The Ministry of Defence launched Project MoDEL (Ministry of Defence Estates
London) in 2006 to consolidate many of its London-based operations at RAF
Northolt. Under the project, RAF Bentley Priory,[68] RAF Uxbridge,[69] RAF
West Ruislip,[70] RAF Eastcote[71] and the Inglis Barracks in Mill Hill were
all closed between 2006 and 2010 with any remaining units transferring to
Northolt.[69] The Air Historical Branch, originally established in 1919 to
provide a record of air activity during the First World War, was also
relocated to RAF Northolt from RAF Bentley Priory in 2008 as part of this
project.[72] As a result, the station has been extensively redeveloped with
new facilities to support these operations.[73]

The statue, Letter from Home, of a First World War soldier reading a letter
was moved from outside Inglis Barracks in Mill Hill to RAF Northolt in June
2007. It is a replica of the statue at Paddington Station and was first
unveiled in 1982.[74] Following the relocation of the British Forces Post
Office and Defence Courier Service from Mill Hill,[75] a new headquarters and
main sorting facility were built for their use which opened in November
2007.[76] New hangar facilities for the use of No. 32 Squadron were also
constructed, along with new personnel accommodation.[77]

The original 1920s Officers' Mess was refurbished as part of the work,[78]
which also saw the relocation of the replica Supermarine Spitfire gate
guardian to the passenger terminal, and the unveiling of a new replica Hawker
Hurricane gate guardian near the eastern station entrance in September 2010,
commemorating the aircrew based at Northolt who had fought in the Battle of
Britain.[79]

Upon the closure of RAF Uxbridge, control of the Battle of Britain Bunker
passed to RAF Northolt to allow continued public visits.[80] In December 2010
it was agreed that the South Hillingdon branch of the St. John Ambulance
service would move from its existing base in RAF Uxbridge to new premises at
Northolt.[81]

The station's new police dog section, featuring kennels and a quarantine
building, opened in February 2012, marking the completion of building
work.[82]

The following flying and notable non-flying units based at RAF Northolt.[83]

**No. 2 Group (Air Combat Support) RAF**

**No. 38 Group (Air Combat Service Support) RAF**

**Other**

**Royal Logistics Corps (29 Explosive Ordnance Disposal and Search Group)**

**Defence Intelligence**

The station is organised into two wings, with a number of lodger units. Within
the Operations Wing, the station houses No. 32 (The Royal) Squadron RAF, and
the Comms Fleet Force Headquarters.[84] 32 Squadron flies two BAe 146 CC.2
four-engine VIP short range transport aircraft and two BAe 146 QC
versions,[85] with one Leonardo GrandNew A109SP helicopter.[86]

The Support Wing of the station incorporates the Personnel Management
Squadron, the Estates Management Squadron, the Station Management Squadron,
the Force Development Squadron, Media and Communications, the Finance
Department and Safety, Health and Environmental Protection. Its Operations
Squadron, the Air Movements Squadron and the Airfield Support Squadron make up
the station's Operations Wing.[84]

Lodger Units at Northolt include No. 600 Squadron Royal Auxiliary Air Force,
621 EOD Squadron Royal Logistics Corps (part of 11 Explosive Ordnance Disposal
and Search Regiment RLC), No. 1 AIDU (Aeronautical Information Documents
Unit), the Central Band of the Royal Air Force, the Service Prosecuting
Authority, Naval Aeronautical Information Centre, the British Forces Post
Office (BFPO), the Air Historical Branch and the Polish Records Office.[84]

2Excel Aviation operate two Piper PA-31 Navajos under a civilian contract for
the RAF following the sale in 2017 of RAF Northolt's Station Flight's two
Britten-Norman Islander CC.2s.[87][88] The Islanders had operated in
electronic intelligence gathering, described by the RAF as performing
"photographic mapping and light communications roles".[89]

In October 2018, a £23 million contract to resurface Northolt's runway was
awarded to Lagan Aviation & Infrastructure as the main contractor, and Mott
MacDonald in a support role.[90]

The No. 32 (The Royal) Squadron fixed wing flight has relocated to RAF Benson
in Oxfordshire, whilst civilian aircraft are using alternative civilian
airports. Helicopters continue to operate from Northolt during the
construction work.[91][92][93]

**Sources** : _Battle of Britain Airfields (1st Edition)_[94] and _A History
of Royal Air Force Northolt_[95]

As it is near several film studios including those at Pinewood, the airfield
has been used to represent outside locations in a number of feature films.
Scenes of the James Bond films _Goldfinger_ , _Thunderball_ and _Octopussy_
were all filmed at Northolt, and station personnel served as extras in the
_Octopussy_ hangar fly-through stunt scene.[96] The mini-series _The Winds of
War_ and _The Bill_ and the BBC shows _Waking the Dead_ , _Doctor Who_ and
_Red Dwarf_ have all used Northolt to represent various fictional
airfields.[96] In early 2010 the station was used for action scenes in the
final episode of the BBC's final series of _Ashes to Ashes_.[97]

  

**Notes**

**Citations**

**Bibliography**

![Underground sign at
Westminster.jpg](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/82/Underground_sign_at_Westminster.jpg/31px-
Underground_sign_at_Westminster.jpg) London transport portal

