**RAF Uxbridge** was a Royal Air Force (RAF) station in Uxbridge, within the
London Borough of Hillingdon, occupying a 44.6-hectare (110-acre) site that
originally belonged to the Hillingdon House estate. The British Government
purchased the estate in 1915, three years before the founding of the RAF.
Until the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, the station was open to
the public.

The station is best known as the headquarters of No. 11 Group RAF, which was
responsible for the aerial defence of London and the south-east of England
during the Battle of Britain. Hillingdon House served as the group's
headquarters. A bunker, subsequently known as the Battle of Britain Bunker,
was built nearby to house the 11 Group Operations Room, which controlled
fighter squadrons operating within the group. The Operations Room was also
responsible for providing air support during the evacuation of Dunkirk in May
1940 (Operation Dynamo) and the D-Day landings (Operation Overlord). It was
here that Winston Churchill first said, "Never in the history of mankind has
so much been owed by so many to so few", which he repeated in a speech to
Parliament four days later.

RAF Uxbridge closed on 31 March 2010 as part of a reduction in the number of
Ministry of Defence installations in the Greater London area. Many of its
remaining military units were relocated to nearby RAF Northolt the following
day. Plans for redevelopment, consisting of a mixture of new residential and
commercial properties and the retention of all listed buildings, were approved
in January 2011.[2] A small part of the station incorporating the Battle of
Britain Bunker retains the RAF Uxbridge name and is owned by Hillingdon
Council.

The River Pinn runs through the site from north to south, passing Hillingdon
House and the Battle of Britain Bunker. The land around the river is mainly
wooded and designated as greenbelt, and Hillingdon Golf Course borders the
south of the station.[3] A footpath through the site that had closed in 1988
was reopened in 2011.

The area that became RAF Uxbridge was long a part of the estate of Hillingdon
House, built as a hunting lodge in 1717 by the Duke of Schomberg, who staged
regular hunts in the grounds. He was a German-born general serving under the
future King William III, and was knighted for his part in the 1690 Battle of
the Boyne.[4]

The Marchioness of Rockingham, widow of Prime Minister Charles Watson-
Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham, bought the house in 1786 for £9,000
(equivalent to £1,144,000 in 2018)[5] following her husband's death and lived
there until her own death in 1804. She left the estate to her stepsister
Elizabeth, widow of William Weddell MP, who sold it to Josias Du Pré Porcher
in 1805.[6]

In 1810 the estate was sold to Richard Henry Cox, grandson of Richard Cox,
founder of the travel company Cox & Kings.[4] Cox & Co, as the company was
then known, was formed after Richard Cox was appointed agent to the Foot
Guards (later the Grenadier Guards), and provided banking services for many
regiments of the British Army by the end of the 18th century.[7] The mansion
was completely rebuilt after it burnt down in 1844 and later received a Grade
II listing as a historic site.[8]

In 1914 the mansion was put on the market by the estate of Frederick Cox,
Richard Henry Cox's grandson. It was described as "a brick and stone building,
partly stuccoed, with extensive outbuildings and ornamental gardens".[5] The
house and gardens, together with the surrounding parkland and an artificial
lake created by damming a section of the River Pinn, amounted to over 81 ha
(200 acres).[4]

The British Government purchased the estate in 1915, with the intention of
establishing a prisoner of war camp. The local population strongly opposed the
plan, causing the government to relent, and the site instead became the
Canadian Convalescent Hospital to care for troops evacuated from the front
line during the First World War.[9] The hospital opened on 20 September 1915
and was joined on 19 November 1917 by the Royal Flying Corps Armament School
which moved into Hillingdon House with 114 officers and 1156 men, making a
donation of £2289.12s.9d (£126,029.27 in 2018) to the Canadian Red Cross. The
RFC used parts of the estate not required by the Canadians, and established
firing ranges for the training of recruits in ground gunnery.[9] A total of
eight of these ranges were built along the River Pinn; one remains today.[10]
The hospital closed on 12 December 1917.[9]

On 1 April 1918, the Uxbridge site came under control of the Royal Air Force,
which had been formed that day by the amalgamation of the Royal Flying Corps
and the Royal Naval Air Service. The following month it became the first RAF
station to receive a royal visit, from King George V.[11]

The Recruits Training Depot and a detachment of the RAF Depot from RAF Halton
arrived in August 1919, merging to form No. 1 Depot, RAF Uxbridge. The station
itself was designated RAF Central Depot, Uxbridge. The site was then split to
form two new RAF stations, the area to the east of the River Pinn heading
uphill to Hillingdon House becoming RAF Hillingdon and the remainder RAF
Uxbridge. That year, the building that became the station cinema was opened,
designed by Lieutenant J. G. N. Clift of the Royal Engineers,[12] and served
as a lecture hall for new recruits.[13] The RAF School of Music moved to RAF
Uxbridge from Hampstead in September 1919. Headquarters Southern Area,
Southern Area Medical Headquarters, Southern Area Barrack Stores, and the
Southern Area and South Eastern Area Headquarters of the Air Construction
Service moved into Hillingdon House in October 1919.[14] T. E. Lawrence,
better known as "Lawrence of Arabia", underwent initial training at the
Uxbridge Depot in 1922 after enlisting in the RAF under the assumed name John
Hume-Ross. He recounted his experiences in _The Mint_.[15]

Uxbridge Football Club was provided with the use of the station stadium from
1923 and played evening matches there.[16] Ten barrack blocks designed by A.
Gilpin were built around the parade ground in 1925,[17] as was the RAF
officers' hospital and the original Operations Room, controlled by the
Fighting Area of Air Defence of Great Britain (ADGB). The Air Ministry chose
RAF Uxbridge as the new base for ADGB on 14 January 1926 owing to its
proximity to Whitehall. The site had the added advantage of lying on the
fringes of London and therefore difficult for an enemy to locate and bomb.[18]
Having also housed a gymnasium, the lecture hall building became the station
cinema in 1927, initially for the use of station personnel only but soon
opened to the general public.[13] On 1 March 1929, the headquarters of the
Observer Corps was established at Hillingdon House; Air Commodore Edward
Masterman was appointed its first commandant. The Observer Corps remained at
RAF Uxbridge until 1 March 1936, when it transferred to RAF Bentley
Priory.[19]

Owing to its wooden construction the original Operations Room could only be
used during the summer months; maintenance of the signalling and
communications equipment became difficult under damp winter conditions. A memo
dated 16 January 1933, sent to the senior Air Staff Officer, Wing Commander
Modin, stated:

Uxbridge Royal Air Force buildings would provide an easy bombing target from
all points of view, I feel that our Operations Room at least must go
underground ... and the sooner it is put there the better, as not only will
the re-installation of communications and apparatus generally take time, but
if that machinery is to function smoothly in a sudden emergency, installation
must have been completed and the whole layout repeatedly worked and tried out
before the danger of such emergency arises.[19]

Douglas Bader arrived at the military hospital in 1932 to recover from the
amputation of his legs following an air crash. During his stay Bader met the
Desoutter brothers, who were beginning to make lightweight artificial legs
from aluminium.[20] Once fitted with artificial legs, Bader fought hard to
regain his former abilities and in time his efforts paid off. He was able to
drive a specially modified car, play golf and even dance. During his
convalescence, Bader met his future wife Thelma Edwards, a waitress at The
Pantiles tearooms in Bagshot 25 miles away.[21]

Formed on 1 May 1936, No. 11 Group RAF was headquartered at RAF Uxbridge under
the command of Air Vice Marshal Philip Joubert de la Ferté, who was succeeded
by Sir Ernest Gossage in January 1937. The ADGB was reorganised on 13 July
1936, with control of fighter aircraft passing to the newly established RAF
Fighter Command, which moved to RAF Bentley Priory. The following day the
remaining elements of ADGB became RAF Bomber Command, headquartered in
Hillingdon House.[22]

Planning for the new 11 Group Operations Room (within what became known as the
Battle of Britain Bunker) began in August 1937. Initially it was to be buried
66 feet (20 m) below ground, but problems with the local London Clay on the
site meant it was eventually built by Sir Robert McAlpine at a depth of 60
feet (18 m), although it was still able to withstand being hit by a 500-pound
(230 kg) bomb. The bunker was designed by Bob Creer of the Air Ministry.[23]
Work began in February 1939 and finished in August, ten days before the
outbreak of the Second World War. The original Operations Room on the surface
remained as a back-up, but was not required for that purpose and was
subsequently renamed Building 76.[24] Also in August 1939, Bomber Command
moved to Iver and on 2 September the new Operations Room and RAF Uxbridge
reached operational war readiness.[25] The station closed to the public on the
outbreak of war, and the football club was required to suspend its use of the
stadium.[16]

During the war, RAF Uxbridge was tasked with despatching personnel to and from
training and operational units in Northern France. It also housed the RAF
Uxbridge Language School, where Polish Air Force pilots were taught key RAF
codewords.[26] Pilots practised formation flying on the station football
pitch, using tricycles fitted with radios, compasses and speed indicators.[27]
British Expeditionary Force troops returning from Dunkirk were processed at
Uxbridge. In mid-1940, staff at the station processed an average of 2,500
recruits and experienced troops per week.[28]

During the Battle of Britain, between July and October 1940, RAF Fighter
Command at RAF Bentley Priory received air threat warnings that it filtered to
remove duplication, doubt and confusion. These were then forwarded to the
Operations Room at RAF Uxbridge, which allocated appropriate defence resources
and passed orders on to No. 11 Group sector airfields.[29] No. 11 Group
personnel doubled to 20,000 between April and November 1940. The RAF officers'
hospital was converted to the Women's Auxiliary Air Force (WAAF) hospital
early in 1940.[30]

While overseeing the operations at RAF Uxbridge, Air Vice Marshal Park stayed
in a house opposite the entrance to the bunker. He used a small door to reach
the bunker from the house each day. The house, named after the war in Park's
honour, was demolished in 1996 to make way for newly constructed married
quarters; only the garden wall and door were retained.[31] Wing Commander
Willoughby de Broke received the Air Force Cross on 11 July 1940 for his
service as a Senior Operations Officer for No. 11 Group, working within the
Operations Room.[32] Prime Minister Winston Churchill visited the station on
16 August 1940, to monitor the battle from the Operations Room. He
subsequently made his well-known comment, "Never in the field of human
conflict was so much owed by so many to so few", to General Ismay as they got
into their car to leave.[33] Churchill repeated the quote in a speech to
Parliament four days later.[34] King George VI and Queen Elizabeth visited the
station on 6 September. Churchill was again present at RAF Uxbridge on 15
September 1940, the fiercest day of fighting of the entire battle and later
named Battle of Britain Day. As the last squadrons were sent into battle,
Churchill asked Air Vice Marshal Sir Keith Park, "How many reserves have we?"
Park answered, "There are none."[33]

A delayed-action landmine fell on the station on 26 September 1940, between
the police school and WAAF Quarters where it remained until it was defused the
following day. Two days later on 28 September a bomb fell into a tree 50 yards
(46 m) from the Operations Room and was later taken to Harefield where it was
defused.[35] A Junkers Ju 88 attacked the station on 6 October 1940, dropping
a bomb beside the Navy, Army and Air Force Institutes (NAAFI) grocery shop.
The device damaged water and gas mains but caused no casualties.[30] Few bombs
fell on the station; Luftwaffe pilots may have mistaken the glass greenhouses
at the Lowe & Shawyer plant nursery west of the station for a large body of
water not on their maps.[35]

The king and queen returned on 1 November 1941, by which time a "Royal Box"
had been installed in the Operations Room from which they could observe the
plotting activities.[33] During 1942, General Charles de Gaulle, Sir Anthony
Eden and Lord Mountbatten all visited the 11 Group Operations Room.[33] The
actors Rex Harrison (then a squadron leader liaising with Bomber Command),
Cyril Raymond and Ronald Adam all served within the Operations Room during the
war.[36]

In 1941, a division of the Meteorological Office was established at RAF
Uxbridge as part of the Intelligence Branch. On 1 July that year, the station
Sick Quarters were merged with the WAAF hospital to create the RAF Station
Hospital.[30] No. 11 Group was involved in providing air support for the
Dieppe Raid (Operation Jubilee) on 19 August 1942.[34] Air Marshal Trafford
Leigh-Mallory commanded participating Allied air forces from the No. 11 Group
Operations Room. The air operations section of Operation Overlord—the Normandy
landings on 6 June 1944 (D-Day)—was also controlled from RAF Uxbridge. Orders
from the station were the only ones issued to Allied air units on the day.[37]
The headquarters of the 2nd Tactical Air Force and 9th Tactical Air Force of
the USAAF were stationed at Uxbridge while preparations were made for the
invasion. On D-Day, the No. 11 Group Controller was responsible for ensuring
sufficient air patrols of the United Kingdom, the main shipping routes, and
the beach landing areas.[38]

RAF Uxbridge served as an athlete's village for the male competitors in the
1948 Summer Olympics. Swimmers trained at nearby Uxbridge Lido, and female
athletes were housed at RAF West Drayton.[39] Personnel from RAF Uxbridge were
moved out to RAF Stanmore Park and transported back to the station daily for
their shifts.[40] In 1949, the RAF Cricket Association opened on Vine Lane on
the western boundary of the station.[41] Also moving into the stations grounds
in October of that year were the 14F squadron or the Air Training Corps, their
access also being via Vine Lane.The station's crest was approved in April
1953, incorporating a drill sergeant's pace stick to symbolise the training of
recruits, and a bugle to represent the Central Band of the RAF; Uxbridge was
the first RAF station in Middlesex to have a crest approved.[42]

The ceremonial entrance to the north-west of the station, St Andrew's Gate,
was officially opened on 16 December 1957 to mark the link between Uxbridge
and the Royal Air Force.[43] A memorial to the personnel of No. 11 Group, made
of Cornish granite, was placed in the ground above the Operations Room in
1957. No. 11 Group moved to RAF Martlesham Heath on 14 April 1958 and the room
was soon sealed in its original condition. The memorial was unveiled by Air
Chief Marshal Lord Dowding on 23 April 1958 in a ceremony attended by Group
Captain Douglas Bader and Wing Commander Lord Willoughby de Broke, among
others, and marked by a flypast of the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight.[44]
Control of RAF Hillingdon passed from Fighter Command to Technical Training
Command that year, at which time the entire site became known as RAF Uxbridge.
The RAF School of Education moved into Hillingdon House from RAF Spitalgate on
10 November 1958,[44] and the station was subsequently merged with No. 22
Group RAF.[45]

The station was granted the Freedom of the London Borough of Hillingdon on 19
March 1960, an honour allowing the station's personnel to march throughout the
borough in uniform. On 1 November that year, the Queen's Colour Squadron of
the RAF Regiment moved to Uxbridge and the Southern Region Air Traffic
Services headquarters moved into Hillingdon House. After the war, the station
was already home to the London Area Control Centre, renamed the London Air
Traffic Control Centre in 1948 and the Uxbridge Air Traffic Control Centre in
1957.[44] This eventually transferred to RAF West Drayton but remained under
the parentage of RAF Uxbridge.[46]

The 11 Group Operations Room was extensively surveyed in order for a replica
to be built at Pinewood Studios for the 1969 film _Battle of Britain_. Scenes
for the 1996 television miniseries _Over Here_ and an episode of Richard
Holmes' _War Walks_ were filmed in the Operations Room itself.[47] The
reinforced Uniter building was built on the site in the 1970s to house
communications equipment. Although no longer used for this purpose, the
building contains two fuel storage tanks.[48] The main entrance to the station
was moved in 1972 from beside the station cinema to its present location
roughly 50 yards (46 m) south.[49]

Over nine months in 1975, the 11 Group Operations Room was restored by No. 9
Signals Unit.[50] The original map was repaired and returned to the table by
the RAF Cartography unit, and the board detailing the readiness and activities
of each sector squadron was rebuilt to resemble its status on 15 September
1940. In 1985 a museum was created within the bunker by Warrant Officer Robert
"Chris" Wren and the Operations Room opened for group visits.[51]

In January 1981, the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) planted a bomb in
the Suvla barrack block at RAF Uxbridge. The device was discovered and the
thirty-five RAF musicians and fifteen airmen living there were evacuated
before it exploded. Following the incident, an enquiry began and security at
all RAF stations was reviewed.[51] The following year, many RAF personnel from
the station were deployed during the Falklands War.[52] The station went on to
celebrate its 70th anniversary in 1987 by staging several events that raised
£30,000 (£82,900 in 2018) for the RAF Benevolent Fund.[53]

RAF Uxbridge also became involved in Operation Granby following the Iraqi
Invasion of Kuwait in August 1990. Personnel at Uxbridge were prepared for
service in the Gulf at that time and deployed in December that year. During
the aerial assault on Iraq in January 1991, support group meetings began at
the station for the families of service personnel serving during the Gulf War.
Prince Edward, Earl of Wessex, visited one of these groups in February
1991.[54]

The station church, St Luke's, became structurally unsound on 21 November 1990
after the foundations failed. The building dated back to 1933 and had been
constructed of wood; the walls were pushed out and the floor rose by 4 inches
(100 mm). In March 1993, the Leigh-Mallory bridge was opened across the River
Pinn, and the church moved into a new permanent home, Building 231, in March
1995. Jim Bolger, then Prime Minister of New Zealand, visited the station in
May, and in October the station's new sports centre opened.[54]

RAF Uxbridge personnel were once more prepared for action in the Gulf in 2003
in readiness for Operation Telic in Iraq. A support network for the families
of service personnel sent into action was again established at the station. In
March 2003 the Under-Secretary of State for Defence was briefed at Uxbridge as
part of preparations for a visit to the Gulf.[55]

Personnel paraded through Uxbridge town centre on 28 November 2007, exercising
the freedom of the borough granted to the station in 1960.[56] RAF Uxbridge
became a satellite station of RAF Northolt on 1 April 2008, in preparation for
eventual closure.[57] In the final years of RAF ownership, the Service
Prosecuting Authority and Civil Aviation Authority's UK Airprox Board
(investigating air proximity incidents) was based in Hillingdon House.[58] The
final of the national Carnegie Champions schools rugby tournament was held at
the station in August 2008.[59] The link between RAF Uxbridge and the Royal
Observer Corps was renewed in 2008 with the closure of RAF Bentley Priory and
the relocation to Uxbridge of ROC memorabilia from the Priory Officers' Mess
for safekeeping and display (the Royal Observer Corps having been stood down
from operational duties in December 1995).[60]

The Queen's Colour Squadron returned from a six-month tour of duty in
Afghanistan in 2009, marked by a homecoming parade through Uxbridge town
centre held on 5 August 2009. More than 20,000 people watched the parade,
which started from Uxbridge Magistrates Court, passing along the town's High
Street to the RAF station.[61]

Sources: _RAF Uxbridge 90th Anniversary 1917–2007_ ,[62] _RAF Uxbridge – A
Fond Farewell_ ,[63] and Ministry of Defence.[64]

Prior to the closure of RAF Uxbridge, Queen Elizabeth II sent a message to the
station in February 2010, via her equerry, Wing Commander A. D. Calame, who
had served as Officer Commanding the Queen's Colour Squadron between 10 August
2005 and 16 July 2007:

Her Majesty was interested to hear that, in this anniversary year, the
historic Number 11 Group Operations Rooms Bunker has been listed and will be
preserved as a Royal Air Force asset. Hopefully, the facility will continue as
a permanent reminder of those who fought and won the Battle of Britain.  
Her Majesty hopes that the relocation to Royal Air Force Northolt will
continue to progress well, and wishes all personnel at Uxbridge best wishes
for the future.[66]

The station closed on 31 March 2010 as part of the Ministry of Defence's
Project MoDEL, a programme to reduce the number of defence sites in Greater
London in favour of a core site at RAF Northolt. The closure ceremony was
overseen by the Mayor of Hillingdon and included parades and the final
lowering of the Royal Air Force Ensign over the parade ground.[34] A
Supermarine Spitfire conducted a flypast of the station.[45] The final units
marched to their new station at RAF Northolt the following day.[67] The
station, which had received the Freedom of the Borough of Hillingdon, returned
the award to the London Borough of Hillingdon as part of the ceremony,[68]
though this was returned on 4 September to be stored in the museum of the
Battle of Britain Bunker.[69] A commemorative blue plaque dedicated to Douglas
Bader was unveiled by the Mayor of Hillingdon at the entrance to the Officers'
Mess.[68]

The Middlesex Wing Headquarters of the Air Training Corps (ATC) had been based
at the station together with No. 1083 Squadron ATC, which met on Mondays and
Thursdays for parade nights.[46] As part of the closing ceremony, personnel of
No. 1083 Squadron were presented with the station crest to adopt as their
own.[34] The squadron continued to meet at the station until July 2010, when a
newly refurbished building at the TA Centre on Honeycroft Hill became
available.[70]

The Grade I listed Battle of Britain Bunker is now preserved as a museum open
to the public,[71] while the Grade II listed Hillingdon House will be
partially converted into a restaurant.[72] The station cinema is also Grade II
listed.[73] The Battle of Britain War Memorial is a scheduled protected
monument.[3] Although not listed, several other buildings on the site were
identified within the plans for possible retention: the Sick Quarters, the
Officers' Mess, the original gymnasium, the carpenters' block in the grounds
of Hillingdon House and a building near the Battle of Britain Bunker. St.
Andrew's Gate will be retained, as will the Mons barrack block adjacent to the
parade ground.[74]

Plans to develop the remaining 44.6 hectares (110 acres) of the site were
approved by the London Borough of Hillingdon in January 2011 for 1,340 homes,
shops, a theatre and a primary school to be built over ten years.[2] The
council intends the development to become an extension of Uxbridge town
centre.[75] Early suggestions from the Leader of Hillingdon Council included a
theatre with a statue of T.E. Lawrence outside, and a new museum built around
the Battle of Britain Bunker.[76] MP for Uxbridge John Randall called in 2009
for Hillingdon Hospital to be relocated to the site as an alternative to a
planned rebuilding project on its existing site.[77] The hospital trust ruled
out such a move due to the projected costs.[78]

The area around the Battle of Britain Bunker, including the No. 11 Group
memorial, will retain the RAF Uxbridge name and be maintained by RAF Northolt
as an exclave.[37] The Royal Air Force Ensign was moved to the area, together
with the Supermarine Spitfire gate guardian, a fibreglass replica of aircraft
BR600.[46] The Spitfire was refurbished and painted in the D-Day invasion
colours of No. 33 Squadron as aircraft BS239, funded by the London Borough of
Hillingdon.[79] Uxbridge's first gate guardian was a real Supermarine Spitfire
which was unveiled on 23 May 1973. This was sold to a collector for
restoration and replaced by the current guardian in 1988.[46] At a service
commemorating the Battle of Britain in September 2010, a new Hawker Hurricane
gate guardian in the markings of No. 303 Polish Fighter Squadron was unveiled,
also near the bunker.[69] The guardian is a fibreglass replica of the aircraft
flown by Witold Urbanowicz during the Battle of Britain.[80]

The South Hillingdon branch of the St. John Ambulance service was based at RAF
Uxbridge until the closure in 2010 led to a period of uncertainty over its
relocation. Eventually, RAF Northolt provided the charity with new premises,
which were available from January 2011.[81]

In June 2011, it was announced that the public right of way from St Andrew's
Gate in the north-west to Vine Lane in the north-east would be reopened, after
work to fence off the pathway was completed. The path, 800 metres (2,600 ft)
long, was the subject of a petition submitted to Hillingdon Council in 2010
and had been closed since 1988.[82] The path was reopened in early August
2011.[83]

Since closing, the site has been used extensively for filming. Most recently,
scenes for the television drama _Endeavour_ , set in the 1960s, were filmed
there.[84]

In April 2012, VSM Estates announced it would be completing the purchase of
the site from the MoD, with a view to commencing building work by the end of
the year.[85] VSM were provided with a £60 million five-year loan by HSBC,
together with funding from joint parent companies, St. Modwen Properties and
Vinci plc. Persimmon will develop 8.9 hectares (22 acres) of the site with 500
homes under an existing joint venture agreement with St Modwen.[86] Demolition
of the site in phases began in October 2012.[87] The site will be developed
under the St Andrew's Park name.[88]

A wood commemorating the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II was planted within
the site in May 2012. Each school in the London Borough of Hillingdon was
invited to plant a tree, and the Station Commander of RAF Northolt, Group
Captain Tim O'Brien, also planted one on behalf of the RAF.[89] The wood was
officially dedicated by the London Borough of Hillingdon's Representative
Deputy Lieutenant, Wing Commander Edna Partridge, on 19 July 2012.[90]

A ground-breaking ceremony was held on 2 July 2013 on the site, attended by
the Mayor of Hillingdon and cabinet members of Hillingdon Council. The
development is due to be completed within seven years.[91]

A new primary school, built on the site of the former sports ground and gym,
opened in September 2014. Named the John Locke Academy, the school will have
630 primary places and 90 nursery places when fully subscribed.[92]

An additional planning application for the construction of office buildings
was submitted by St. Modwen in June 2015.[93]

**Citations**

**Bibliography**

