**Randall Lynn Stephenson** (born April 22, 1960) is an American
telecommunications executive. He is the current chairman and chief executive
officer (CEO) of AT&T Inc. since May 9, 2007. He served as National Chair of
the Boy Scouts of America from 2016 to 2018.

Stephenson earned an MA from the University of Oklahoma,[1] then began his
career in 1982 with Southwestern Bell Telephone in the information-technology
organization in Oklahoma. Late in the 1980s through 1990s, he progressed
through a series of leadership positions in finance, including an
international assignment in Mexico City overseeing SBT's investment in
Telefonos de Mexico (Telmex), where, according to Bloomberg, he was mentored
by Carlos Slim.[2] In July 2001, he was appointed chief financial officer for
SBC, helping the company reduce its net debt from $30 billion to near zero by
early 2004. From 2003 to 2004, Stephenson served as chairman of the board of
directors for Cingular Wireless. In 2004, he was named chief operating officer
of SBC and also appointed by President Bush as National Security
Telecommunications Advisory Committee.

Stephenson continued as COO following SBC's acquisition of AT&T in 2005,
responsible for all wireless and wireline operations at AT&T. In April 2007,
AT&T announced Stephenson would succeed retiring Edward Whitacre as CEO.
Stephenson served as chairman of the Business Roundtable from 2014 to 2016.[3]

In April 2015, Stephenson was named as a co-defendant in a lawsuit filed by
Knoyme King, an assistant at AT&T. According to King, Stephenson was complicit
in covering up racist texts sent by then-President Aaron Slator.[4] King's
suit against AT&T removed Stephenson as a co-defendant after an attempt to
obtain his deposition in April 2016 failed.[5] The case against the remaining
defendants was settled out of court in September 2016.[6]

In September 2016, Stephenson gave a speech regarding race relations at AT&Tâ€™s
annual Employee Resource Group conference in Dallas. An employee posted a
video of the speech to YouTube, in which Stephenson asked attendees to make a
greater effort to understand each other and communicate better.[7]

During his tenure as CEO, AT&T acquired DirecTV for $49 billion in July 2015
and Time Warner for $85 billion in June 2018. According to Drew FitzGerald of
The Wall Street Journal, Stephenson has "transformed the phone company he
inherited into one of the world's biggest entertainment companies."[8]

He was the 36th National President of the Boy Scouts of America, serving from
2016[9] until 2018.[10] Stephenson, as well as fellow board member Jim Turley,
CEO of Ernst & Young, publicly opposed the BSA's practice of banning openly
gay Scouts and stated their intention "to work from within the BSA Board to
actively encourage dialogue and sustainable progress."[11]

Stephenson maintains homes in Preston Hollow, Dallas and Olmos Park, San
Antonio, Texas. Stephenson is a member of the Council on Foreign
Relations.[12]

