**Raoul A. Walsh** (March 11, 1887 – December 31, 1980) was an American film
director, actor, founding member of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and
Sciences (AMPAS) and the brother of the silent screen actor George Walsh. He
was known for portraying John Wilkes Booth in the silent classic _The Birth of
a Nation_ (1915) and for directing such films as _The Big Trail_ (1930),
starring John Wayne, _High Sierra_ (1941), starring Ida Lupino and Humphrey
Bogart; and _White Heat_ (1949), starring James Cagney and Edmond O'Brien. He
directed his last film in 1964.

Walsh was born in New York as Albert Edward Walsh to Elizabeth T. Bruff, the
daughter of Irish Catholic immigrants, and Thomas W. Walsh, an Englishman.
Like his younger brother, he was part of Omega Gamma Delta in high school.
Growing up in New York, Walsh was also a friend of the Barrymore family. (John
Barrymore recalled spending time reading in the Walsh family library as a
youth.) Later in life he lived in Palm Springs, California.[2] He was buried
at Assumption Cemetery Simi Valley, Ventura County, California.

Walsh was educated at Seton Hall College. He began acting in 1909, first as a
stage actor in New York City and later as a film actor. In 1914 he became an
assistant to D.W. Griffith and made his first full-length feature film, _The
Life of General Villa_ , shot on location in Mexico with Pancho Villa playing
the lead and with actual ongoing battles filmed in progress as well as
recreations (events dramatized in the 2003 film _And Starring Pancho Villa as
Himself_ , with Kyle Chandler playing Walsh).

Walsh played John Wilkes Booth in Griffith's epic _The Birth of a Nation_
(1915) and also served as an assistant director. This was followed by the
critically acclaimed _Regeneration_ in 1915, possibly the earliest feature
gangster film, shot on location in Manhattan's Bowery district.

Walsh served as an officer in the United States Army during World War I. He
later directed _The Thief of Bagdad_ (1924), starring Douglas Fairbanks and
Anna May Wong, and Laurence Stallings' _What Price Glory?_ (1926), starring
Victor McLaglen and Dolores del Río.

In _Sadie Thompson_ (1928), starring Gloria Swanson as a prostitute seeking a
new life in Samoa, Walsh starred as Swanson's boyfriend in his first acting
role since 1915; he also directed the film. He was then hired to direct and
star in _In Old Arizona_ , a film about O. Henry's character the Cisco Kid.
While on location for that film Walsh was in a car crash when a jackrabbit
jumped through the windshield as he was driving through the desert; he lost
his right eye as a result. He gave up the part and never acted again. Warner
Baxter won an Oscar for the role Walsh was originally slated to play. Walsh
would wear an eyepatch for the rest of his life.

In the early days of sound with Fox, Walsh directed the first widescreen
spectacle, _The Big Trail_ (1930), an epic wagon train western shot on
location across the West. The movie starred John Wayne, then unknown, whom
Walsh discovered as prop boy Marion Morrison and renamed after the
Revolutionary War general Mad Anthony Wayne; Walsh happened to be reading a
book about him at the time. Walsh directed _The Bowery_ (1933), featuring
Wallace Beery, George Raft, Fay Wray and Pert Kelton; the energetic movie
recounts the story of Steve Brodie (Raft), supposedly the first man to jump
off the Brooklyn Bridge and live to brag about it.

An undistinguished period followed with Paramount Pictures from 1935 to 1939,
but Walsh's career rose to new heights after he moved to Warner Brothers, with
_The Roaring Twenties_ (1939), featuring James Cagney and Humphrey Bogart;
_Dark Command_ (1940), with John Wayne and Roy Rogers (at Republic Pictures);
_They Drive By Night_ (1940), with George Raft, Ann Sheridan, Ida Lupino and
Bogart; _High Sierra_ (1941), with Lupino and Bogart again; _They Died with
Their Boots On_ (1941), with Errol Flynn as Custer; _The Strawberry Blonde_
(1941), with Cagney and Olivia de Havilland; _Manpower_ (1941), with Edward G.
Robinson, Marlene Dietrich and George Raft; and _White Heat_ (1949), with
Cagney. Walsh's contract at Warners expired in 1953.

He directed several films afterwards, including three with Clark Gable: _The
Tall Men_ (1955), _The King and Four Queens_ (1956) and _Band of Angels_
(1957). Walsh retired in 1964. He died of a heart attack in 1980. [3]

Some of Walsh's film-related material and personal papers are contained in the
Wesleyan University Cinema Archives, to which scholars and media experts from
around the world may have full access.[4]

Walsh replaced director Bretaigne Windust, who fell severely ill, on _The
Enforcer_ and shot over half the film, but refused to take screen credit.

Himself (1973)

