**Raymond Sharkey Jr.** (November 14, 1952 – June 11, 1993) was an American
stage, film and television actor. His most notable film role was that of
Vincent Vacarri in the 1980 film _The Idolmaker_ for which he won the Golden
Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. He is also
known for his role as Sonny Steelgrave in the television series _Wiseguy_.

Sharkey was born in Brooklyn to Cecelia and Ray Sharkey, Sr. He was of Irish
and Italian descent. Sharkey's father was a professional drummer who abandoned
the family when Sharkey was five years old.[1] He was raised by his mother,
Cecelia in Brooklyn's Red Hook neighborhood.[1][2] Sharkey became interested
in acting after seeing Jack Lemmon in the 1962 film _Days of Wine and Roses_.
After attending New York City Community College for one year, he enrolled at
the HB Studio to study acting. While attending the HB Studio, Sharkey
performed in various Off-Broadway stage productions. In 1973, he and his
friend boxer/actor Chu Chu Malave moved to Los Angeles to pursue acting
careers.[3][4]

In 1974, he made his film debut in _The Lords of Flatbush_. Sharkey went on to
appear in more than forty motion pictures and dozens of guest appearances on
various television series.

In 1980, Sharkey portrayed rock promoter "Vincent "Vinnie" Vacarri" in _The
Idolmaker_. The role boosted Sharkey's career and earned him a Golden Globe
Award for his performance in the film.[3] The following year, he was nominated
for another Golden Globe for his role in _The Ordeal of Bill Carney_ , in
which he played the title role. Shortly after appearing in _The Idolmaker_ ,
Sharkey developed a $400 a day heroin habit. As a result of his drug use, his
career declined and he was relegated to mainly supporting roles. He overdosed
several times and was involved in four drug-related car accidents, two of
which required him to undergo microsurgery on his eyes. He tried undergoing
rehab treatment several times but would ultimately relapse a few months later.
In 1987, Sharkey spent two months in an Orange County rehab center in an
effort to kick his drug and alcohol addiction for good.[1][4]

Four days after leaving rehab, he won the role of Sonny Steelgrave in the
series _Wiseguy_. The character proved to be popular with audiences and
boosted Sharkey's career. The character was written out of the series in 1989.
Sharkey then co-starred in the biographical film _Wired_. Based on the life of
John Belushi, Sharkey portrayed a Puerto Rican angel who meets Belushi after
his death in the morgue and "show[s] him the error of his ways." Sharkey's
next role was in the 1989 black comedy film _Scenes from the Class Struggle in
Beverly Hills_.[5]

In 1991, he starred in the ABC sitcom _The Man in the Family_. While Sharkey
received good reviews for his performance, the show was panned by critics and
canceled after one season. The following year, he appeared in a guest spot on
_Jake and the Fatman_ , and starred in the television movie _In the Line of
Duty: Street War_. On July 30, 1992, while filming a guest spot on the
television series, _The Hat Squad_ , in Vancouver, he was arrested for drug
possession. Canadian customs officials, making a routine inspection of
incoming cargo at the airport, discovered small amounts of cocaine and heroin
in a black envelope being sent from Los Angeles to Sharkey in Vancouver.
Police searched his hotel room and found an additional supply of drugs. He was
jailed and later released on bail. Sharkey was later fired from _The Hat
Squad_.[6] Sharkey's final role was in the 1993 comedy film _Cop and a Half_.

In May 1981, Sharkey married model Rebecca Wood.[7] The marriage ended in 1986
due to Sharkey's drug abuse.[4] In 1988, he married actress Carole Graham.
That marriage produced one daughter, Cecelia, in 1989.[1] In November 1992,
Graham divorced Sharkey also citing his drug abuse as the reason for the
divorce.[8]

On September 22, 2015, Sharkey's daughter, Cecelia, was charged with capital
murder for the death of her boyfriend's mother.[9] In November 2017 she
pleaded no contest, was declared insane at the time of the crime and was
committed to Patton State Hospital.[10]

Sharkey was diagnosed as HIV positive in the late 1980s. He reportedly
contracted the virus through intravenous drug use. After his death, Sharkey's
manager Herb Nanas admitted that they both decided to keep his diagnosis a
secret fearing it would hurt his career. Despite his diagnosis, Sharkey
remained in denial about his HIV positive status and, according to his
manager, had sex with an estimated 100 women after he was diagnosed.[11][12]

In April 1991, Sharkey began a relationship with model/actress Elena Monica,
daughter of comedian Corbett Monica. In July 1991, she became ill and was
hospitalized with aseptic meningitis. During a routine check, she tested
positive for HIV. Monica believed she contracted the virus from Sharkey who
continued to deny that he had infected her. Monica ended the relationship in
October 1991 due to her suspicions. In July 1992, she learned that another
woman also suspected that Sharkey had infected her with HIV as well. Later
that same year, Monica filed a $52 million lawsuit against the actor for
knowingly infecting her with HIV.[12]

In an interview with _Details_ magazine conducted in March 1993, three months
before his death, Sharkey told the reporter that he was in fact HIV-positive
by saying that he "harbored a strain of HIV" that he believed would never
develop into AIDS. At the time of the interview, Sharkey weighed 80 pounds (36
kg), had a hacking cough and was suffering from a brain lesion.[13] When asked
about his ex-girlfriend Elena Monica who accused him of infecting her with
HIV, Sharkey said, "This disease is funny. One day you're negative and the
next day you're positive. And people suffer. I don't think she suffered from
me."[11] Monica won her lawsuit against Sharkey by default judgment after his
death (Sharkey declined to challenge her suit when it was originally filed),
but she received no compensation from his estate because the actor had very
little money.[14]

On June 11, 1993, Sharkey died of complications from AIDS at Lutheran Medical
Center in Brooklyn, New York, at age 40.[15] He is interred in Saint Charles
Cemetery in Farmingdale, Long Island, New York.

In June 1993, shortly after Sharkey's death, a Beverly Hills graphic designer,
who said she had an on-and-off relationship with Sharkey from 1985 to 1991,
announced that she was suing Sharkey's estate. The woman, who was only
identified as "Joyce", cared for Sharkey in his final months and said that she
believed that she also had contracted HIV from Sharkey after she was diagnosed
with the virus in April 1992.[16]

