_**Refinery29**_ is an American digital media and entertainment company
focused on young women.

Justin Stefano, Philippe von Borries, Piera Gelardi, and Christene Barberich
co-founded Refinery29 in 2005 as a fashion focused city guide, emphasizing
unique fashion discoveries that were local to New York City. The name of the
website alludes to the website distilling information into its essence.[5] The
company headquarters is located in the Financial District, Manhattan
neighborhood of New York City.[6]

Refinery29 has over 450 employees globally[7] and has offices in Los
Angeles,[8] London,[9] and Berlin.[9] In 2015, the company launched a UK
edition at www.refinery29.uk and the following year in 2016, a German edition
at www.refinery29.de. In 2016, Refinery29 announced it had raised $45 million
in funding led by Turner.[10] As of 2017, Refinery29 reaches an audience of
over 500 million globally across platforms.[11]

Refinery29 produces editorial and video programming, live events, and social,
shareable content delivered across major social media platforms, and covers a
variety of categories including style, health, food, entertainment, careers,
technology, news, politics, and more. In August 2018, Refinery29 made an
official section for music journalism on their website.[12][13] Although this
official section was created in 2018, music writing on Refinery29 was
widespread before this date. As early as 2013, Refinery29 published "The Best
Music Blogs That Aren't Pitchfork," featuring other online music publications
like _The Fader_ , _Obscure Sound_ and _Earmilk_.[14]

Refinery29 has accounts on Snapchat and Instagram, where they upload various
photos, videos and articles on a range of topics for young women. One of the
accounts is under the name "R29unbothered", which is for women of color by
women of color. It covers every aspect of in the life of women of color from
topics like hair and skin to work environment and relationships. It features
different speakers in a series called "Go Off Sis", in which Black millennial
women share their experiences and views on a range of topics and controversial
issues.

Refinery29 was listed three consecutive years on _Crain's_ "Fast
50",[15][16][17] has won seven Clio Awards,[18][19][20][21][22][23] and seven
Webby Awards.[24][25][24][26][27][28]

The company produces an annual pop-up exhibition, 29Rooms, where visitors
commonly take self-portraits for sharing on Instagram.[29][30] 29Rooms was
launched in 2015 on Refinery29's 10-Year Anniversary.[31]

  

