In behavioral psychology, **reinforcement** is a consequence applied that will
strengthen an organism's future behavior whenever that behavior is preceded by
a specific antecedent stimulus. This strengthening effect may be measured as a
higher frequency of behavior (e.g., pulling a lever more frequently), longer
duration (e.g., pulling a lever for longer periods of time), greater magnitude
(e.g., pulling a lever with greater force), or shorter latency (e.g., pulling
a lever more quickly following the antecedent stimulus). There are two types
of reinforcement, known as positive reinforcement and negative reinforcement;
positive is where by a reward is offered on expression of the wanted behaviour
and negative is taking away an undesirable element in the persons environment
whenever the desired behaviour is achieved.

Rewarding stimuli, which are associated with "wanting" and "liking" (desire
and pleasure, respectively) and appetitive behavior, function as positive
reinforcers;[1] the converse statement is also true: positive reinforcers
provide a desirable stimulus.[1] Reinforcement does not require an individual
to consciously perceive an effect elicited by the stimulus.[2] Thus,
reinforcement occurs only if there is an observable strengthening in behavior.
However, there is also negative reinforcement, which is characterized by
taking away an undesirable stimulus. Changing someone's job might serve as a
negative reinforcer to someone whom suffers from back problems, i.e. Changing
from a labourers job to an office position for instance.

In most cases, the term "reinforcement" refers to an enhancement of behavior,
but this term is also sometimes used to denote an enhancement of memory; for
example, "post-training reinforcement" refers to the provision of a stimulus
(such as food) after a learning session in an attempt to increase the retained
breadth, detail, and duration of the individual memories or overall memory
just formed.[3] The memory-enhancing stimulus can also be one whose effects
are directly rather than only indirectly emotional, as with the phenomenon of
"flashbulb memory," in which an emotionally highly intense stimulus can
incentivize memory of a set of a situation's circumstances well beyond the
subset of those circumstances that caused the emotionally significant
stimulus, as when people of appropriate age are able to remember where they
were and what they were doing when they learned of the assassination of John
F. Kennedy or of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks.[4]

Reinforcement is an important part of operant or instrumental conditioning.

In the behavioral sciences, the terms "positive" and "negative" refer when
used in their strict technical sense to the nature of the action performed by
the conditioner rather than to the responding operant's evaluation of that
action and its consequence(s). "Positive" actions are those that add a factor,
be it pleasant or unpleasant, to the environment, whereas "negative" actions
are those that remove or withhold from the environment a factor of either
type. In turn, the strict sense of "reinforcement" refers only to reward-based
conditioning; the introduction of unpleasant factors and the removal or
withholding of pleasant factors are instead referred to as "punishment," which
when used in its strict sense thus stands in contradistinction to
"reinforcement." Thus, "positive reinforcement" refers to the addition of a
pleasant factor, "positive punishment" refers to the addition of an unpleasant
factor, "negative reinforcement" refers to the removal or withholding of an
unpleasant factor, and "negative punishment" refers to the removal or
withholding of a pleasant factor.

This usage is at odds with some non-technical usages of the four term
combinations, especially in the case of the term "negative reinforcement,"
which is often used to denote what technical parlance would describe as
"positive punishment" in that the non-technical usage interprets
"reinforcement" as subsuming both reward and punishment and "negative" as
referring to the responding operant's evaluation of the factor being
introduced. By contrast, technical parlance would use the term "negative
reinforcement" to describe encouragement of a given behavior by creating a
scenario in which an unpleasant factor is or will be present but engaging in
the behavior results in either escaping from that factor or preventing its
occurrence, as in Martin Seligman's experiments involving dogs' learning
processes regarding the avoidance of electric shock.

B.F. Skinner was a well-known and influential researcher who articulated many
of the theoretical constructs of reinforcement and behaviorism. Skinner
defined reinforcers according to the change in response strength (response
rate) rather than to more subjective criteria, such as what is pleasurable or
valuable to someone. Accordingly, activities, foods or items considered
pleasant or enjoyable may not necessarily be reinforcing (because they produce
no increase in the response preceding them). Stimuli, settings, and activities
only fit the definition of reinforcers if the behavior that immediately
precedes the potential reinforcer increases in similar situations in the
future; for example, a child who receives a cookie when he or she asks for
one. If the frequency of "cookie-requesting behavior" increases, the cookie
can be seen as reinforcing "cookie-requesting behavior". If however, "cookie-
requesting behavior" does not increase the cookie cannot be considered
reinforcing.

The sole criterion that determines if a stimulus is reinforcing is the change
in probability of a behavior after administration of that potential
reinforcer. Other theories may focus on additional factors such as whether the
person expected a behavior to produce a given outcome, but in the behavioral
theory, reinforcement is defined by an increased probability of a response.

The study of reinforcement has produced an enormous body of reproducible
experimental results. Reinforcement is the central concept and procedure in
special education, applied behavior analysis, and the experimental analysis of
behavior and is a core concept in some medical and psychopharmacology models,
particularly addiction, dependence, and compulsion.

Laboratory research on reinforcement is usually dated from the work of Edward
Thorndike, known for his experiments with cats escaping from puzzle boxes.[9]
A number of others continued this research, notably B.F. Skinner, who
published his seminal work on the topic in The Behavior of Organisms, in 1938,
and elaborated this research in many subsequent publications.[10] Notably
Skinner argued that positive reinforcement is superior to punishment in
shaping behavior.[11] Though punishment may seem just the opposite of
reinforcement, Skinner claimed that they differ immensely, saying that
positive reinforcement results in lasting behavioral modification (long-term)
whereas punishment changes behavior only temporarily (short-term) and has many
detrimental side-effects. A great many researchers subsequently expanded our
understanding of reinforcement and challenged some of Skinner's conclusions.
For example, Azrin and Holz defined punishment as a “consequence of behavior
that reduces the future probability of that behavior,”[12] and some studies
have shown that positive reinforcement and punishment are equally effective in
modifying behavior. Research on the effects of positive reinforcement,
negative reinforcement and punishment continue today as those concepts are
fundamental to learning theory and apply to many practical applications of
that theory.

The term _operant conditioning_ was introduced by B. F. Skinner to indicate
that in his experimental paradigm the organism is free to operate on the
environment. In this paradigm the experimenter cannot trigger the desirable
response; the experimenter waits for the response to occur (to be emitted by
the organism) and then a potential reinforcer is delivered. In the classical
conditioning paradigm the experimenter triggers (elicits) the desirable
response by presenting a reflex eliciting stimulus, the _Unconditional
Stimulus_ (UCS), which he pairs (precedes) with a neutral stimulus, the
_Conditional Stimulus_ (CS).

_Reinforcement_ is a basic term in operant conditioning. For the punishment
aspect of operant conditioning – see punishment (psychology).

Positive reinforcement occurs when a desirable event or stimulus is presented
as a consequence of a behavior and the chance that this behavior will manifest
in similar environments increases.[13]:253

The High Probability Instruction (HPI) treatment is a behaviorist
psychological treatment based on the idea of positive reinforcement.

Negative reinforcement occurs when the rate of a behavior increases because an
aversive event or stimulus is removed or prevented from happening.[13]:253

Extinction can be intentional or unintentional and happens when you ignore an
undesired behavior.

Reinforcers serve to increase behaviors whereas punishers serve to decrease
behaviors; thus, positive reinforcers are stimuli that the subject will work
to attain, and negative reinforcers are stimuli that the subject will work to
be rid of or to end.[14] The table below illustrates the adding and
subtracting of stimuli (pleasant or aversive) in relation to reinforcement vs.
punishment.

A **primary reinforcer** , sometimes called an _unconditioned reinforcer_ , is
a stimulus that does not require pairing with a different stimulus in order to
function as a reinforcer and most likely has obtained this function through
the evolution and its role in species' survival.[16] Examples of primary
reinforcers include food, water, and sex. Some primary reinforcers, such as
certain drugs, may mimic the effects of other primary reinforcers. While these
primary reinforcers are fairly stable through life and across individuals, the
reinforcing value of different primary reinforcers varies due to multiple
factors (e.g., genetics, experience). Thus, one person may prefer one type of
food while another avoids it. Or one person may eat lots of food while another
eats very little. So even though food is a primary reinforcer for both
individuals, the value of food as a reinforcer differs between them.

A **secondary reinforcer** , sometimes called a **conditioned reinforcer** ,
is a stimulus or situation that has acquired its function as a reinforcer
after pairing with a stimulus that functions as a reinforcer. This stimulus
may be a primary reinforcer or another conditioned reinforcer (such as money).
An example of a secondary reinforcer would be the sound from a clicker, as
used in clicker training. The sound of the clicker has been associated with
praise or treats, and subsequently, the sound of the clicker may function as a
reinforcer. Another common example is the sound of people clapping – there is
nothing inherently positive about hearing that sound, but we have learned that
it is associated with praise and rewards.

When trying to distinguish primary and secondary reinforcers in human
examples, use the "caveman test." If the stimulus is something that a caveman
would naturally find desirable (e.g., candy) then it is a primary reinforcer.
If, on the other hand, the caveman would not react to it (e.g., a dollar
bill), it is a secondary reinforcer. As with primary reinforcers, an organism
can experience satiation and deprivation with secondary reinforcers.

In his 1967 paper, _Arbitrary and Natural Reinforcement_ , Charles Ferster
proposed classifying reinforcement into events that increase frequency of an
operant as a natural consequence of the behavior itself, and events that are
presumed to affect frequency by their requirement of human mediation, such as
in a token economy where subjects are "rewarded" for certain behavior with an
arbitrary token of a negotiable value. In 1970, Baer and Wolf created a name
for the use of natural reinforcers called "behavior traps".[20] A behavior
trap requires only a simple response to enter the trap, yet once entered, the
trap cannot be resisted in creating general behavior change. It is the use of
a behavioral trap that increases a person's repertoire, by exposing them to
the naturally occurring reinforcement of that behavior. Behavior traps have
four characteristics:

As can be seen from the above, artificial reinforcement is in fact created to
build or develop skills, and to generalize, it is important that either a
behavior trap is introduced to "capture" the skill and utilize naturally
occurring reinforcement to maintain or increase it. This behavior trap may
simply be a social situation that will generally result from a specific
behavior once it has met a certain criterion (e.g., if you use edible
reinforcers to train a person to say hello and smile at people when they meet
them, after that skill has been built up, the natural reinforcer of other
people smiling, and having more friendly interactions will naturally reinforce
the skill and the edibles can be faded).[ _citation needed_ ]

Much behavior is not reinforced every time it is emitted, and the pattern of
intermittent reinforcement strongly affects how fast an operant response is
learned, what its rate is at any given time, and how long it continues when
reinforcement ceases. The simplest rules controlling reinforcement are
continuous reinforcement, where every response is reinforced, and extinction,
where no response is reinforced. Between these extremes, more complex
"schedules of reinforcement" specify the rules that determine how and when a
response will be followed by a reinforcer.

Specific schedules of reinforcement reliably induce specific patterns of
response, irrespective of the species being investigated (including humans in
some conditions). However, the quantitative properties of behavior under a
given schedule depend on the parameters of the schedule, and sometimes on
other, non-schedule factors. The orderliness and predictability of behavior
under schedules of reinforcement was evidence for B.F. Skinner's claim that by
using operant conditioning he could obtain "control over behavior", in a way
that rendered the theoretical disputes of contemporary comparative psychology
obsolete. The reliability of schedule control supported the idea that a
radical behaviorist experimental analysis of behavior could be the foundation
for a psychology that did not refer to mental or cognitive processes. The
reliability of schedules also led to the development of applied behavior
analysis as a means of controlling or altering behavior.

Many of the simpler possibilities, and some of the more complex ones, were
investigated at great length by Skinner using pigeons, but new schedules
continue to be defined and investigated.

Simple schedules have a single rule to determine when a single type of
reinforcer is delivered for a specific response.

Simple schedules are utilized in many differential reinforcement[22]
procedures:

Compound schedules combine two or more different simple schedules in some way
using the same reinforcer for the same behavior. There are many possibilities;
among those most often used are:

The psychology term _superimposed schedules of reinforcement_ refers to a
structure of rewards where two or more simple schedules of reinforcement
operate simultaneously. Reinforcers can be positive, negative, or both. An
example is a person who comes home after a long day at work. The behavior of
opening the front door is rewarded by a big kiss on the lips by the person's
spouse and a rip in the pants from the family dog jumping enthusiastically.
Another example of superimposed schedules of reinforcement is a pigeon in an
experimental cage pecking at a button. The pecks deliver a hopper of grain
every 20th peck, and access to water after every 200 pecks.

Superimposed schedules of reinforcement are a type of compound schedule that
evolved from the initial work on simple schedules of reinforcement by B.F.
Skinner and his colleagues (Skinner and Ferster, 1957). They demonstrated that
reinforcers could be delivered on schedules, and further that organisms
behaved differently under different schedules. Rather than a reinforcer, such
as food or water, being delivered every time as a consequence of some
behavior, a reinforcer could be delivered after more than one instance of the
behavior. For example, a pigeon may be required to peck a button switch ten
times before food appears. This is a "ratio schedule". Also, a reinforcer
could be delivered after an interval of time passed following a target
behavior. An example is a rat that is given a food pellet immediately
following the first response that occurs after two minutes has elapsed since
the last lever press. This is called an "interval schedule".

In addition, ratio schedules can deliver reinforcement following fixed or
variable number of behaviors by the individual organism. Likewise, interval
schedules can deliver reinforcement following fixed or variable intervals of
time following a single response by the organism. Individual behaviors tend to
generate response rates that differ based upon how the reinforcement schedule
is created. Much subsequent research in many labs examined the effects on
behaviors of scheduling reinforcers.

If an organism is offered the opportunity to choose between or among two or
more simple schedules of reinforcement at the same time, the reinforcement
structure is called a "concurrent schedule of reinforcement". Brechner (1974,
1977) introduced the concept of superimposed schedules of reinforcement in an
attempt to create a laboratory analogy of social traps, such as when humans
overharvest their fisheries or tear down their rainforests. Brechner created a
situation where simple reinforcement schedules were superimposed upon each
other. In other words, a single response or group of responses by an organism
led to multiple consequences. Concurrent schedules of reinforcement can be
thought of as "or" schedules, and superimposed schedules of reinforcement can
be thought of as "and" schedules. Brechner and Linder (1981) and Brechner
(1987) expanded the concept to describe how superimposed schedules and the
social trap analogy could be used to analyze the way energy flows through
systems.

Superimposed schedules of reinforcement have many real-world applications in
addition to generating social traps. Many different human individual and
social situations can be created by superimposing simple reinforcement
schedules. For example, a human being could have simultaneous tobacco and
alcohol addictions. Even more complex situations can be created or simulated
by superimposing two or more concurrent schedules. For example, a high school
senior could have a choice between going to Stanford University or UCLA, and
at the same time have the choice of going into the Army or the Air Force, and
simultaneously the choice of taking a job with an internet company or a job
with a software company. That is a reinforcement structure of three
superimposed concurrent schedules of reinforcement.

Superimposed schedules of reinforcement can create the three classic conflict
situations (approach–approach conflict, approach–avoidance conflict, and
avoidance–avoidance conflict) described by Kurt Lewin (1935) and can
operationalize other Lewinian situations analyzed by his force field analysis.
Other examples of the use of superimposed schedules of reinforcement as an
analytical tool are its application to the contingencies of rent control
(Brechner, 2003) and problem of toxic waste dumping in the Los Angeles County
storm drain system (Brechner, 2010).

In operant conditioning, concurrent schedules of reinforcement are schedules
of reinforcement that are simultaneously available to an animal subject or
human participant, so that the subject or participant can respond on either
schedule. For example, in a two-alternative forced choice task, a pigeon in a
Skinner box is faced with two pecking keys; pecking responses can be made on
either, and food reinforcement might follow a peck on either. The schedules of
reinforcement arranged for pecks on the two keys can be different. They may be
independent, or they may be linked so that behavior on one key affects the
likelihood of reinforcement on the other.

It is not necessary for responses on the two schedules to be physically
distinct. In an alternate way of arranging concurrent schedules, introduced by
Findley in 1958, both schedules are arranged on a single key or other response
device, and the subject can respond on a second key to change between the
schedules. In such a "Findley concurrent" procedure, a stimulus (e.g., the
color of the main key) signals which schedule is in effect.

Concurrent schedules often induce rapid alternation between the keys. To
prevent this, a "changeover delay" is commonly introduced: each schedule is
inactivated for a brief period after the subject switches to it.

When both the concurrent schedules are variable intervals, a quantitative
relationship known as the matching law is found between relative response
rates in the two schedules and the relative reinforcement rates they deliver;
this was first observed by R.J. Herrnstein in 1961. Matching law is a rule for
instrumental behavior which states that the relative rate of responding on a
particular response alternative equals the relative rate of reinforcement for
that response (rate of behavior = rate of reinforcement). Animals and humans
have a tendency to prefer choice in schedules.[26]

Shaping is reinforcement of successive approximations to a desired
instrumental response. In training a rat to press a lever, for example, simply
turning toward the lever is reinforced at first. Then, only turning and
stepping toward it is reinforced. The outcomes of one set of behaviours starts
the shaping process for the next set of behaviours, and the outcomes of that
set prepares the shaping process for the next set, and so on. As training
progresses, the response reinforced becomes progressively more like the
desired behavior; each subsequent behaviour becomes a closer approximation of
the final behaviour.[27]

Chaining involves linking discrete behaviors together in a series, such that
each result of each behavior is both the reinforcement (or consequence) for
the previous behavior, and the stimuli (or antecedent) for the next behavior.
There are many ways to teach chaining, such as forward chaining (starting from
the first behavior in the chain), backwards chaining (starting from the last
behavior) and total task chaining (in which the entire behavior is taught from
beginning to end, rather than as a series of steps). An example is opening a
locked door. First the key is inserted, then turned, then the door opened.

Forward chaining would teach the subject first to insert the key. Once that
task is mastered, they are told to insert the key, and taught to turn it. Once
that task is mastered, they are told to perform the first two, then taught to
open the door. Backwards chaining would involve the teacher first inserting
and turning the key, and the subject then being taught to open the door. Once
that is learned, the teacher inserts the key, and the subject is taught to
turn it, then opens the door as the next step. Finally, the subject is taught
to insert the key, and they turn and open the door. Once the first step is
mastered, the entire task has been taught. Total task chaining would involve
teaching the entire task as a single series, prompting through all steps.
Prompts are faded (reduced) at each step as they are mastered.

Persuasion is a form of human interaction. It takes place when one individual
expects some particular response from one or more other individuals and
deliberately sets out to secure the response through the use of communication.
The communicator must realize that different groups have different
values.[28]:24–25

In instrumental learning situations, which involve operant behavior, the
persuasive communicator will present his message and then wait for the
receiver to make a correct response. As soon as the receiver makes the
response, the communicator will attempt to fix the response by some
appropriate reward or reinforcement.[29]

In conditional learning situations, where there is respondent behavior, the
communicator presents his message so as to elicit the response he wants from
the receiver, and the stimulus that originally served to elicit the response
then becomes the reinforcing or rewarding element in conditioning.[28]

A lot of work has been done in building a mathematical model of reinforcement.
This model is known as MPR, short for mathematical principles of
reinforcement. Peter Killeen has made key discoveries in the field with his
research on pigeons.[30]

The standard definition of behavioral reinforcement has been criticized as
circular, since it appears to argue that response strength is increased by
reinforcement, and defines reinforcement as something that increases response
strength (i.e., response strength is increased by things that increase
response strength). However, the correct usage[31] of reinforcement is that
something is a reinforcer _because_ of its effect on behavior, and not the
other way around. It becomes circular if one says that a particular stimulus
strengthens behavior because it is a reinforcer, and does not explain why a
stimulus is producing that effect on the behavior. Other definitions have been
proposed, such as F.D. Sheffield's "consummatory behavior contingent on a
response", but these are not broadly used in psychology.[32]

Increasingly understanding of the role reinforcers play is moving away from a
"strengthening" effect to a "signalling" effect.[33] That is, the view that
reinforcers increase responding because they signal the behaviours that a
likely to result in reinforcement. While in most practical applications, the
effect of any given reinforcer will be the same regardless of whether the
reinforcer is signalling or strengthening, this approach helps to explain a
number of behavioural phenomenon including patterns of responding on
intermittent reinforcement schedules (fixed interval scallops) and the
differential outcomes effect.[34]

In the 1920s Russian physiologist Ivan Pavlov may have been the first to use
the word _reinforcement_ with respect to behavior, but (according to Dinsmoor)
he used its approximate Russian cognate sparingly, and even then it referred
to strengthening an already-learned but weakening response. He did not use it,
as it is today, for selecting and strengthening new behaviors. Pavlov's
introduction of the word _extinction_ (in Russian) approximates today's
psychological use.

In popular use, _positive reinforcement_ is often used as a synonym for
_reward_ , with people (not behavior) thus being "reinforced", but this is
contrary to the term's consistent technical usage, as it is a dimension of
behavior, and not the person, which is strengthened. _Negative reinforcement_
is often used by laypeople and even social scientists outside psychology as a
synonym for _punishment_. This is contrary to modern technical use, but it was
B.F. Skinner who first used it this way in his 1938 book. By 1953, however, he
followed others in thus employing the word _punishment_ , and he re-cast
_negative reinforcement_ for the removal of aversive stimuli.

There are some within the field of behavior analysis[35] who have suggested
that the terms "positive" and "negative" constitute an unnecessary distinction
in discussing reinforcement as it is often unclear whether stimuli are being
removed or presented. For example, Iwata poses the question: "...is a change
in temperature more accurately characterized by the presentation of cold
(heat) or the removal of heat (cold)?"[36]:363 Thus, reinforcement could be
conceptualized as a pre-change condition replaced by a post-change condition
that reinforces the behavior that followed the change in stimulus conditions.

Reinforcement and punishment are ubiquitous in human social interactions, and
a great many applications of operant principles have been suggested and
implemented. Following are a few examples.

Positive and negative reinforcement play central roles in the development and
maintenance of addiction and drug dependence. An addictive drug is
intrinsically rewarding; that is, it functions as a primary positive
reinforcer of drug use. The brain's reward system assigns it incentive
salience (i.e., it is "wanted" or "desired"),[37][38][39] so as an addiction
develops, deprivation of the drug leads to craving. In addition, stimuli
associated with drug use – e.g., the sight of a syringe, and the location of
use – become associated with the intense reinforcement induced by the
drug.[37][38][39] These previously neutral stimuli acquire several properties:
their appearance can induce craving, and they can become conditioned positive
reinforcers of continued use.[37][38][39] Thus, if an addicted individual
encounters one of these drug cues, a craving for the associated drug may
reappear. For example, anti-drug agencies previously used posters with images
of drug paraphernalia as an attempt to show the dangers of drug use. However,
such posters are no longer used because of the effects of incentive salience
in causing relapse upon sight of the stimuli illustrated in the posters.

In drug dependent individuals, negative reinforcement occurs when a drug is
self-administered in order to alleviate or "escape" the symptoms of physical
dependence (e.g., tremors and sweating) and/or psychological dependence (e.g.,
anhedonia, restlessness, irritability, and anxiety) that arise during the
state of drug withdrawal.[37]

Animal trainers and pet owners were applying the principles and practices of
operant conditioning long before these ideas were named and studied, and
animal training still provides one of the clearest and most convincing
examples of operant control. Of the concepts and procedures described in this
article, a few of the most salient are: availability of immediate
reinforcement (e.g. the ever-present bag of dog yummies); contingency,
assuring that reinforcement follows the desired behavior and not something
else; the use of secondary reinforcement, as in sounding a clicker immediately
after a desired response; shaping, as in gradually getting a dog to jump
higher and higher; intermittent reinforcement, reducing the frequency of those
yummies to induce persistent behavior without satiation; chaining, where a
complex behavior is gradually put together.[40]

Providing positive reinforcement for appropriate child behaviors is a major
focus of parent management training. Typically, parents learn to reward
appropriate behavior through social rewards (such as praise, smiles, and hugs)
as well as concrete rewards (such as stickers or points towards a larger
reward as part of an incentive system created collaboratively with the
child).[41] In addition, parents learn to select simple behaviors as an
initial focus and reward each of the small steps that their child achieves
towards reaching a larger goal (this concept is called "successive
approximations").[41][42] They may also use indirect rewards such through
progress charts. Providing positive reinforcement in the classroom can be
beneficial to student success. When applying positive reinforcement to
students, it's crucial to make it individualized to that student's needs. This
way, the student understands why they are receiving the praise, they can
accept it, and eventually learn to continue the action that was earned by
positive reinforcement. For example, using rewards or extra recess time might
apply to some students more, whereas others might accept the enforcement by
receiving stickers or check marks indicating praise.

Both psychologists and economists have become interested in applying operant
concepts and findings to the behavior of humans in the marketplace. An example
is the analysis of consumer demand, as indexed by the amount of a commodity
that is purchased. In economics, the degree to which price influences
consumption is called "the price elasticity of demand." Certain commodities
are more elastic than others; for example, a change in price of certain foods
may have a large effect on the amount bought, while gasoline and other
essentials may be less affected by price changes. In terms of operant
analysis, such effects may be interpreted in terms of motivations of consumers
and the relative value of the commodities as reinforcers.[43]

As stated earlier in this article, a variable ratio schedule yields
reinforcement after the emission of an unpredictable number of responses. This
schedule typically generates rapid, persistent responding. Slot machines pay
off on a variable ratio schedule, and they produce just this sort of
persistent lever-pulling behavior in gamblers. Because the machines are
programmed to pay out less money than they take in, the persistent slot-
machine user invariably loses in the long run. Slots machines, and thus
variable ratio reinforcement, have often been blamed as a factor underlying
gambling addiction.[44]

Nudge theory (or nudge) is a concept in behavioural science, political theory
and economics which argues that positive reinforcement and indirect
suggestions to try to achieve non-forced compliance can influence the motives,
incentives and decision making of groups and individuals, at least as
effectively – if not more effectively – than direct instruction, legislation,
or enforcement.

The concept of praise as a means of behavioral reinforcement in humans is
rooted in B.F. Skinner's model of operant conditioning. Through this lens,
praise has been viewed as a means of positive reinforcement, wherein an
observed behavior is made more likely to occur by contingently praising said
behavior.[45] Hundreds of studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of
praise in promoting positive behaviors, notably in the study of teacher and
parent use of praise on child in promoting improved behavior and academic
performance,[46][47] but also in the study of work performance.[48] Praise has
also been demonstrated to reinforce positive behaviors in non-praised adjacent
individuals (such as a classmate of the praise recipient) through vicarious
reinforcement.[49] Praise may be more or less effective in changing behavior
depending on its form, content and delivery. In order for praise to effect
positive behavior change, it must be contingent on the positive behavior
(i.e., only administered after the targeted behavior is enacted), must specify
the particulars of the behavior that is to be reinforced, and must be
delivered sincerely and credibly.[50]

Acknowledging the effect of praise as a positive reinforcement strategy,
numerous behavioral and cognitive behavioral interventions have incorporated
the use of praise in their protocols.[51][52] The strategic use of praise is
recognized as an evidence-based practice in both classroom management[51] and
parenting training interventions,[47] though praise is often subsumed in
intervention research into a larger category of positive reinforcement, which
includes strategies such as strategic attention and behavioral rewards.

Braiker identified the following ways that manipulators control their
victims:[53]

Traumatic bonding occurs as the result of ongoing cycles of abuse in which the
intermittent reinforcement of reward and punishment creates powerful emotional
bonds that are resistant to change.[54][55]

The other source indicated that [56] 'The necessary conditions for traumatic
bonding are that one person must dominate the other and that the level of
abuse chronically spikes and then subsides. The relationship is characterized
by periods of permissive, compassionate, and even affectionate behavior from
the dominant person, punctuated by intermittent episodes of intense abuse. To
maintain the upper hand, the victimizer manipulates the behavior of the victim
and limits the victim's options so as to perpetuate the power imbalance. Any
threat to the balance of dominance and submission may be met with an
escalating cycle of punishment ranging from seething intimidation to intensely
violent outbursts. The victimizer also isolates the victim from other sources
of support, which reduces the likelihood of detection and intervention,
impairs the victim's ability to receive countervailing self-referent feedback,
and strengthens the sense of unilateral dependency...The traumatic effects of
these abusive relationships may include the impairment of the victim's
capacity for accurate self-appraisal, leading to a sense of personal
inadequacy and a subordinate sense of dependence upon the dominating person.
Victims also may encounter a variety of unpleasant social and legal
consequences of their emotional and behavioral affiliation with someone who
perpetrated aggressive acts, even if they themselves were the recipients of
the aggression. '.

Most video games are designed around some type of compulsion loop, adding a
type of positive reinforcement through a variable rate schedule to keep the
player playing the game, though this can also lead to video game
addiction.[57]

As part of a trend in the monetization of video games in the 2010s, some games
offered "loot boxes" as rewards or purchasable by real-world funds that
offered a random selection of in-game items, distributed by rarity. The
practice has been tied to the same methods that slot machines and other
gambling devices dole out rewards, as it follows a variable rate schedule.
While the general perception that loot boxes are a form of gambling, the
practice is only classified as such in a few countries as gambling and
otherwise legal. However, methods to use those items as virtual currency for
online gambling or trading for real-world money has created a skin gambling
market that is under legal evaluation.[58]

Ashforth discussed potentially destructive sides of leadership and identified
what he referred to as petty tyrants: leaders who exercise a tyrannical style
of management, resulting in a climate of fear in the workplace.[59] Partial or
intermittent negative reinforcement can create an effective climate of fear
and doubt.[53] When employees get the sense that bullies are tolerated, a
climate of fear may be the result.[60]

Individual differences in sensitivity to reward, punishment, and motivation
have been studied under the premises of reinforcement sensitivity theory and
have also been applied to workplace performance.

