**Sir Richard Rodney Bennett** CBE (29 March 1936 – 24 December 2012) was an
English composer of film, TV and concert music, and also a jazz pianist. He
was based in New York City from 1979 until his death there in 2012.[1]

Bennett was born at Broadstairs, Kent, but was raised in Devon during World
War II.[1] His mother, Joan Esther (Spink), was a pianist who had trained with
Gustav Holst and sang in the first professional performance of _The
Planets_.[2][3] His father, Rodney Bennett, (1890–1948) was a children's book
author and poet, who worked with Roger Quilter on his theatre works and
provided new words for some of the numbers in the _Arnold Book of Old Songs_.

Bennett was a pupil at Leighton Park School.[4] He later studied at the Royal
Academy of Music with Howard Ferguson, Lennox Berkeley and Cornelius Cardew.
Ferguson regarded him as extraordinarily brilliant, having perhaps the
greatest talent of any British composer in his generation, though lacking in a
personal style. During this time, Bennett attended some of the Darmstadt
summer courses in 1955, where he was exposed to serialism. He later spent two
years in Paris as a student of the prominent serialist Pierre Boulez between
1957 and 1959.[5] He always used both his first names after finding another
Richard Bennett active in music.

Bennett taught at the Royal Academy of Music between 1963 and 1965, at the
Peabody Institute in Baltimore, United States from 1970 to 1971, and was later
International Chair of Composition at the Royal Academy of Music between 1994
and the year 2000. He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British
Empire (CBE) in 1977, and was knighted in 1998.[6]

Bennett produced over two hundred works for the concert hall, and fifty scores
for film and television. He was also a writer and performer of jazz songs for
fifty years. Immersed in the techniques of the European avant-garde via his
contact with Boulez, Bennett subsequently developed his own dramato-abstract
style. In his later years, he adopted an increasingly tonal idiom.

Bennett regularly performed as a jazz pianist, with such singers as Cleo
Laine, Marion Montgomery (until her death in 2002), Mary Cleere Haran (until
her death in 2011), and more recently with Claire Martin,[4] performing the
Great American Songbook. Bennett and Martin performed at such venues as The
Oak Room at The Algonquin in New York (which closed in 2012), and The
Pheasantry and Ronnie Scott's in London.

In later years, in addition to his musical activities, Bennett became known as
an artist working in the medium of collage.[7] He exhibited these collages
several times in England, including at the Holt Festival, Norfolk[8] in 2011,
and at the Swaledale Festival, Yorkshire, in 2012.[9] The first ever
exhibition of his collages was in London in 2010, at the South Kensington and
Chelsea Mental Health Centre, curated by the Nightingale Project, a charity
that takes music and art into hospitals. Bennett was a patron of this
charity.[10] Bennett is honoured with four photographic portraits in the
collection of the National Portrait Gallery, London.

Anthony Meredith's biography of Bennett was published in November 2010.[11]
Bennett is survived by his sister Meg (born 1930), the poet M. R. Peacocke,
with whom he collaborated on a number of vocal works.

Bennett's cremated remains are buried at Green-wood Cemetery, Brooklyn.[12]

Despite his early studies in modernist techniques, Bennett's tastes were
catholic. He wrote in a wide range of styles, including jazz, for which he had
a particular fondness. Early on, he began to write music for feature films. He
said that it was as if the different styles of music that he was writing went
on 'in different rooms, albeit in the same house'.[7] Later in his career the
different aspects all became equally celebrated – for example in his 75th
birthday year (2011), there were numerous concerts featuring all the different
strands of his work. At the BBC Proms for example his _Murder on the Orient
Express Suite_ was performed in a concert of film music, and in the same
season his _Dream Dancing_ and _Jazz Calendar_ were also featured. Also at the
Wigmore Hall, London, on 23 March 2011 (a few days before Bennett's 75th
birthday), a double concert took place in which his Debussy-inspired piece
_Sonata After Syrinx_ was performed in the first concert, and in the Late
Night Jazz Event which followed, Bennett and Claire Martin performed his
arrangements of the Great American Songbook (Cole Porter, George Gershwin,
Rodgers and Hart and so on). See also Tom Service's appreciation of Bennett's
music published in The Guardian in July 2012.[13]

He wrote music for films and television; among his scores were the _Doctor
Who_ story _The Aztecs_ (1964) for television, and the feature films _Billion
Dollar Brain_ (1967), _Lady Caroline Lamb_ (1972) and _Equus_ (1977). His
scores for _Far from the Madding Crowd_ (1967), _Nicholas and Alexandra_
(1971), and _Murder on the Orient Express_ (1974), each earned him Academy
Award nominations, with _Murder on the Orient Express_ gaining a BAFTA award.
Later works include _Enchanted April_ (1992), _Four Weddings and a Funeral_
(1994), and _The Tale of Sweeney Todd_ (1998). He was also a prolific composer
of orchestral works, piano solos, choral works and operas. Despite this
eclecticism, Bennett's music rarely involved stylistic crossover.

Solo:

with Marion Montgomery

with Carol Sloane (singer)

with Chris Connor (singer)

with Mary Cleere Haran (singer)

with Claire Martin

Opera

Orchestral

Choral

