**RoboBraille** is a web and email service capable of converting documents
into a range of accessible formats including Braille, mp3, e-books and Daisy.
The service can furthermore be used to convert otherwise inaccessible
documents such as scanned images and pdf files into more accessible formats.
RoboBraille has been in operation since 2004 and currently serves thousands of
user requests each month from users across the world. The service is available
for free for strictly individual, non-commercial use. Institutional use by
academic institutions is available through SensusAccess.

The RoboBraille service is developed jointly by the National Danish Center for
Visual Impairment for Children and Youth and Sensus ApS. RoboBraille is
available free of charge for individual, non-commercial users and users need
not register to use the service. Commercial use in any form is prohibited. The
development and operation of RoboBraille has been funded by the Danish
Government, the European Commission and private foundations. Many
organisations have contributed to the development of the RoboBraille service
including Royal National College for the Blind based in Hereford, United
Kingdom, St Joseph's School for the Blind, Ireland, the National Council for
the Blind of Ireland, Irish Republic, Associazione Nazionale Subvedenti,
Italy, CIDEF, Portugal, Hilfsgemeinschaft der Blinden und Sehschwachen
Österreichs, Austria, Medison, Poland, The Lithuanian Association of the Blind
and Visually Handicapped, Lithuania, Association Valentin Haüy, France, and
the Pancyprian Organization of the Blind, Cyprus.

In November 2012, the RoboBraille service received the WISE 2012 award from
Qatar Foundation in recognition of its contribution to inclusive and barrier-
free education. In January 2010, the RoboBraille services received the
prestiguous BETT Award . The service has previously received the BETT Award
for best Special Education Needs solution (2010), Access IT Award for Learning
for most affordable eLearning solution (2009), The National eWell-Being Award
for ”Reaching the Digitally Excluded” (2009), the European Commission
eInclusion Award for e-Accessibility Award (2008), the Well-Tech Award for
Innovation and Accessibility (2008) and the British Computer Society's Social
Contribution Award (2007).

RoboBraille offers four main categories of services:

In addition to the traditional email-interface, RoboBraille is available via
the web form at http://www.robobraille.org/

RoboBraille was invented in 2004 by Lars Ballieu Christensen, a computer
scientist and social entrepreneur and Svend Thougaard, an alternate media
specialist. The system was developed in Denmark with the assistance of the
Royal National College for the Blind based in Hereford, United Kingdom.[1] The
system was launched in June 2006 and was the winner of a British Computer
Society Social Contribution Project Award in 2007.[1]

