**Roger Lacey Stevens** (March 12, 1910 â€“ February 2, 1998) was an American
theatrical producer, arts administrator, and real estate executive. He was the
founding Chairman of both the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts (1961)
and the National Endowment for the Arts (1965).

Born in Detroit, Michigan, Stevens was educated at The Choate School (now
Choate Rosemary Hall) in Wallingford, Connecticut. He was about to enter
Harvard University but his father's financial difficulties ended his plan. He
attended the University of Michigan for a year before dropping out. He then
worked on a Ford assembly line and at a gas station during the Depression.[1]

In 1934, he joined a Detroit real estate firm. By 1937, before he was 30, his
real estate work had made him a small fortune of about $50,000. He led a
syndicate (along with Ben Tobin and Alfred R. Glancy Jr.)[2] that bought the
Empire State Building in 1951 for $51 million, then a titanic sum; he more
than doubled his investment when he sold his interest in the building three
years later.[3]

In 1953, together with Alfred R. Glancy Jr., Ben Tobin, and H. Adams Ashforth,
he founded Unico Properties to develop a 10-acre University of Washington site
in central Seattle.[4][5]

In politics, he made a mark as chairman of the Democratic Party's finance
committee in 1956.[6]

He produced more than 100 plays and musicals over his career, including _West
Side Story_ , _Bus Stop_ , and _Cat on a Hot Tin Roof_. In 1971, he received
Special Tony Award for his body of work. He became known for introducing plays
by such adventurous writers as Harold Pinter, Arthur Kopit and Tom
Stoppard.[7]

Stevens was the General Administrator of the Actors Studio as well as one of
the producers of the Playwrights Company, a member of the board of the
American National Theatre and Academy (ANTA), and one of the members of a
Broadway producing company he founded in 1953 with Robert Whitehead, and
Robert Dowling. In 1961, he was asked by President John F. Kennedy to help
establish a _National Cultural Center,_[8] and became Chairman of Board of
Trustees of what was eventually named the Kennedy Center from 1961 to 1988.

In 1965, he received an appointment from President Lyndon Johnson as first
Chairman of the National Council on the Arts later named the National
Endowment for the Arts.

In 1986, Stevens was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame.[9]

On January 13, 1988, Stevens was presented with the Presidential Medal of
Freedom by President Ronald Reagan. In 1988, he was also awarded the National
Medal of Arts.

Stevens was married to Christine Gesell Stevens, founder of the Animal Welfare
Institute in 1951. He served as the organization's treasurer until his death
in 1998. They had a daughter, Christabel.

He had his first heart attack in 1970. In 1993, he suffered strokes that left
him partly paralyzed and deprived him of much of his speech.

Roger Stevens died of pneumonia on February 2, 1998 at Georgetown University
Medical Center in Washington, D.C.[10] He was 87.

