**Romanization of Persian** or **Latinization of Persian** (Persian:
لاتین‌نویسی فارسی‎, romanized: _Lâtinnavisiye fârsi_ , pronounced
[lɒːtiːn.næviːˌsije fɒːɹˈsiː]) is the representation of the Persian language
(Farsi, Dari and Tajik) with the Latin script. Several different romanization
schemes exist, each with its own set of rules driven by its own set of
ideological goals.

Because the Perso-Arabic script is an abjad writing system (with a consonant-
heavy inventory of letters), many distinct words in standard Persian can have
identical spellings, with widely varying pronunciations that differ in their
(unwritten) vowel sounds. Thus a romanization paradigm can follow either
transliteration (which mirrors spelling and orthography) or transcription
(which mirrors pronunciation and phonology).

The Latin script plays in Iran the role of a second script. For the proof of
this assertion it is sufficient to take a look at the city and street signs or
the Internet addresses in all countries. On the other hand, experience has
shown that efforts to teach millions of Iranian young people abroad in reading
and writing Persian mostly prove to be unsuccessful, due to the lack of daily
contact with the Persian script. It seems that a way out of this dilemma has
been found; and that is the use of the Latin script parallel to the Persian
script.

Transliteration (in the strict sense) attempts to be a complete representation
of the original writing, so that an informed reader should be able to
reconstruct the original spelling of unknown transliterated words.
Transliterations of Persian are used to represent individual Persian words or
short quotations, in scholarly texts in English or other languages that do not
use the Arabic alphabet.

A transliteration will still have separate representations for different
consonants of the Persian alphabet that are pronounced identically in Persian.
Therefore, transliterations of Persian are often based on transliterations of
Arabic.[1] The representation of the vowels of the Perso-Arabic alphabet is
also complex, and transliterations are based on the written form.

Transliterations commonly used in the English-speaking world include BGN/PCGN
romanization and ALA-LC Romanization.

Non-academic English-language quotation of Persian words usually uses a
simplification of one of the strict transliteration schemes (typically
omitting diacritical marks) and/or unsystematic choices of spellings meant to
guide English speakers using English spelling rules towards an approximation
of the Persian sounds.

Transcriptions of Persian attempt to straightforwardly represent Persian
phonology in the Latin script, without requiring a close or reversible
correspondence with the Perso-Arabic script, and also without requiring a
close correspondence to English phonetic values of Roman letters.

**Notes** :

In the pre-Islamic period Old and Middle Persian employed various scripts
including Old Persian cuneiform, Pahlavi and Avestan scripts. For each period
there are established transcriptions and transliterations by prominent
linguists.[5][9][10][11][12]

**Notes** :

Bahá'ís use a system standardized by Shoghi Effendi, which he initiated in a
general letter on March 12, 1923.[13] The Bahá'í transliteration scheme was
based on a standard adopted by the Tenth International Congress of
Orientalists which took place in Geneva in September 1894. Shoghi Effendi
changed some details of the Congress's system, most notably in the use of
digraphs in certain cases (e.g. __sh__ instead of _š_ ), and in incorporating
the solar letters when writing the definite article _al-_ (Arabic: ال)
according to pronunciation (e.g. _ar-Rahim_ , _as-Saddiq_ , instead of _al-
Rahim_ , _al-Saddiq_ ).

A detailed introduction to the Bahá'í Persian romanization can usually be
found at the back of a Bahá'í scripture.

It is common to write Persian language with only the Latin alphabet (as
opposed to the Persian alphabet) especially in online chat, social networks,
emails and SMS. It has developed and spread due to a former lack of software
supporting the Persian alphabet, and/or due to a lack of knowledge about the
software that was available. Although Persian writing is supported in recent
operating systems, there are still many cases where the Persian alphabet is
unavailable and there is a need for an alternative way to write Persian with
the basic Latin alphabet. This way of writing is sometimes called
**Fingilish** or **Pingilish** (a portmanteau of _Farsi_ or _Persian_ and
_English_ ).[14] In most cases this is an _ad hoc_ simplification of the
scientific systems listed above (such as ALA-LC or BGN/PCGN), but ignoring any
special letters or diacritical signs. ع may be written using the numeral "3",
as in the Arabic chat alphabet (though this is rarely done). The details of
the spelling also depend on the contact language of the speaker; for example,
the vowel [u] is often spelt "oo" after English, but Persian speakers from
Germany and some other European countries are more likely to use "u".

The Tajik language or Tajik Persian is a variety of the Persian language. It
was written in Tajik SSR in a standardized Latin script from 1926 until the
late 1930s, when the script was officially changed to Cyrillic. However, Tajik
phonology differs slightly from that of Persian in Iran. As a result of these
two factors romanization schemes of the Tajik Cyrillic script follow rather
different principles.[15]

