**Ron Moody** (born **Ronald Moodnick** , 8 January 1924 – 11 June 2015) was
an English actor, singer, composer and writer best known for his portrayal of
Fagin in _Oliver!_ (1968) and its 1983 Broadway revival. Moody earned a Golden
Globe Award and an Academy Award nomination for the film, as well as a Tony
Award nomination for the stage production. Other notable projects include _The
Mouse on the Moon_ (1963), Mel Brooks's _The Twelve Chairs_ (1970) and _Flight
of the Doves_ (1971), in which Moody shared the screen with _Oliver!_ co-star
Jack Wild.

Moody holds the peculiar distinction of having portrayed the wizard Merlin in
two Disney films, _Unidentified Flying Oddball_ (1979) and _A Kid in King
Arthur's Court_ (1995).

Moody was born in Tottenham, Middlesex,[1][2], the son of Kate (née Ogus;
1898-1980) and Bernard/Barnett Moodnick (1896-1964), a studio executive.[3]
His father was a Russian Jew and his mother was a Lithuanian Jew; said Moody,
"I'm 100% Jewish—totally kosher!"[4] He was a cousin of director Laurence
Moody and actress Clare Lawrence. His surname was legally changed to the more
anglicised Moody in 1930.[3]

Moody was educated at Southgate County School, which at the time was a state
grammar school, and based in Palmers Green, Middlesex, followed by the London
School of Economics in Central London, where he trained to become an
economist.[5] During World War II he enlisted in the Royal Air Force (RAF) and
became a radar technician.[5]

Despite training to be an economist, Moody began appearing in theatrical shows
and later decided to become a professional actor.[5]

—Moody on his acclaimed role as Fagin and subsequent career.[5]

Moody worked in a variety of genres, but is perhaps best known for his
starring role as Fagin in Lionel Bart's stage and film musical _Oliver!_ based
on _Oliver Twist_ by Charles Dickens. He created the role in the original West
End production in 1960, and reprised it in the 1984 Broadway revival,
garnering a Tony Award nomination for Best Actor in a Musical. For his
performance in the 1968 film _Oliver!_ , he received the Golden Globe Award
for Best Actor (Musical/Comedy), the Best Actor award at the 6th Moscow
International Film Festival and an Academy Award nomination in the same
category.[6] Reflecting on the role, Moody states: "Fate destined me to play
Fagin. It was the part of a lifetime. That summer of 1967 [during filming] was
one of the happiest times of my life".[5] He reprised his role as Fagin at the
1985 Royal Variety Performance in Theatre Royal, Drury Lane before Queen
Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh.[7]

Moody appeared in several children's television series, including the voice of
Badger and Toad in the TV Adaptation of Colin Dann's _The Animals of Farthing
Wood_ , _Noah's Island_ , _Telebugs_ , and _Into the Labyrinth_. Among his
better known roles was that of Prime Minister Rupert Mountjoy in the comedy
_The Mouse on the Moon_ (1963), alongside Margaret Rutherford, with whom he
appeared again the following year in _Murder Most Foul_ (1964), one of
Rutherford's Miss Marple films. He played French entertainer and mime artist
The Great Orlando in the 1963 Cliff Richard film _Summer Holiday_. He acted
again with former _Oliver!_ co-star Jack Wild in _Flight of the Doves_ (1971).

In 1969, Moody was offered, but declined, the lead role in _Doctor Who_ ,
following the departure of Patrick Troughton from the part.[8] He later told
many people (including _Doctor Who_ companion Elisabeth Sladen) that declining
the role was a decision he subsequently regretted.[5] He played Ippolit
Vorobyaninov alongside Frank Langella (as Ostap Bender) in Mel Brooks' version
of _The Twelve Chairs_ (1970). In 2003, he starred in the black comedy
_Paradise Grove_ alongside Rula Lenska, and played Edwin Caldecott, an old
nemesis of Jim Branning on the BBC soap _EastEnders_.[5] In 2005, he acted in
the Big Finish Productions _Doctor Who_ audio play _Other Lives_ , playing the
Duke of Wellington. He made several appearances in BBC TVs long running
variety show, The Good Old Days, enacting pastiche/comic Victorian melodramas.

In 2004, the British ITV1 nostalgia series _After They Were Famous_ hosted a
documentary of the surviving cast of the film _Oliver!_ Several of the film's
musical numbers were reenacted. Moody, then 80 but still spry, and Jack Wild
(seriously ill with oral cancer at the time) recreated their dance from the
closing credits of the film.

Moody appeared in an episode of BBC1's _Casualty_ (aired on 30 January 2010)
as a Scottish patient who had served with the Black Watch during the Second
World War.[5] On 30 June 2010, Moody appeared on stage at the end of a
performance of Cameron Mackintosh's revival of _Oliver!_ and made a humorous
speech about the show's 50th anniversary. He then reprised the "Pick a Pocket
or Two" number with the cast.[5]

Moody was a supporter of Tottenham Hotspur FC.

Moody married a Pilates teacher, Therese Blackbourn, in 1985. The couple had
six children.[9]

Moody died of natural causes whilst in a London hospital on 11 June 2015, aged
91. Following the death of  Sheila White who played Bet left Shani Wallis, who
played Nancy, and Mark Lester, who played Oliver and Kenneth Cranham who
played Noah Claypole as the last surviving cast members from _Oliver!_[10][11]

