**Royal Oak** is a small suburb in New Zealand's largest city of Auckland. It
is situated between the suburbs of Epsom (north) and Onehunga (south).

Royal Oak is under the local governance of the Auckland Council. The
population was 5,562 in the 2013 Census, an increase of 168 from 2006.[1]

It is named after the Royal Oak hotel that was located on the Royal Oak
Roundabout. In 1909 the hotel lost its licence to sell alcohol. For many years
it was a pharmacy before being used as the premises of Barfoot & Thompson Real
Estate Agency. Royal Oak refers to the tree Charles II hid up during the
Battle of Worcester to avoid capture.

In the middle of the Royal Oak Roundabout was once located the Seddon
Memorial. Designed by John Park, a local architect who was also Mayor of
Onehunga at one time, the structure was erected in memory of Prime Minister
Seddon who died suddenly in office in 1906. Richard John Seddon (1845 - 1906)
was immensely popular and there are several monuments to him around the
country. The Royal Oak Monument was in the form of a Gothic Market Cross and
was a combined tram shelter, gas lamp standard and drinking fountain.

By the middle of the 20th century it was decided that the memorial was an
obstruction to traffic and it was removed during September and October
1947.[2] The Royal Oak roundabout served six converging roads but one has been
closed off in recent years.

Royal Oak became the site of New Zealand's first Kentucky Fried Chicken
restaurant in 1971.[3]

Royal Oak Mall was expanded significantly in the 1980s to become a significant
source of commerce in the area.

Royal Oak was once home to Boyd Zoo, one of the earliest Zoological Garden in
New Zealand. It was opened in 1912 by local businessman (and future mayor of
Onehunga) John James Boyd. It held 600 to 2000 specimens including several
lions, bears, wolves, flamingos, and other exotic animals. Most of the animals
were kept in relatively poor conditions. There was an abattoir on site where
local stray animals such as horses and cats were slaughtered to be fed to the
captive animals.

There is an often repeated tale of a lion escaping from the zoo and wandering
around the streets of Onehunga, however this story is somewhat erroneous and
misleading. The first appearance of the story was in a community newspaper in
1966. The most probable origin of the story was a lion cub which had gotten
into a paddock of cows with calves around the Christmas of 1917. Rather than a
wild lion roaming the streets, the small cub was backed into a corner of the
paddock by the herd until it was lassoed and returned to its enclosure.

Although the zoo was popular with visitors, the noise and smell made it very
unpopular with the locals. Boyd was engaged in a constant battle with the
local council over the running of the zoo. Eventually, after several attempts
to sell his animals to the council, the council finally reached an agreement
with Boyd: 11 lions, 6 bears, and 2 wolves were sold to the council for Â£800.
The animals were given to the newly established Auckland Zoo at Western
Springs in 1922.[4][5][6]

The Boyd Zoo site was later built on as a temporary hospital for American
Marines in 1942, before being converted into Manukau Intermediate School (now
renamed as Royal Oak Intermediate School).

The area is served by several state secondary schools including Epsom Girls
Grammar, Auckland Grammar School, One Tree Hill College, St Peter's College,
Onehunga High School, and Marcellin College. The local Primary School is Royal
Oak Primary School, and Intermediate is Royal Oak Intermediate School.

