**Russenorsk** (Norwegian pronunciation: [²rʉsːəˌnɔʂk]; Russian: Руссено́рск,
[rʊsʲɪˈnorsk]; English: Russo-Norwegian) is an extinct dual-source pidgin
language formerly used in the Arctic, which combined elements of Russian and
Norwegian, and which was created by Russian traders and Norwegian fishermen
from northern Norway and the Russian Kola Peninsula. It was used extensively
in Northern Norway for about 150 years in the Pomor trade. Russenorsk is
important as a test case for theories concerning pidgin languages since it was
used far away from most of the other documented pidgins of the world.

As is common in the development of pidgins and trade languages, the
interaction of fishermen and traders with no common language necessitated the
creation of some minimal form of communication. Like all pidgins, Russenorsk
had a rudimentary grammar and a restricted vocabulary, mostly composed of
words essential to Arctic fishing and trade (fish, weather, etc.) and did not
particularly deal with unrelated issues (music, politics, etc.).

Barter existed between Russians and Norwegians for 150 years in Troms and
Finnmark counties. This barter was supported by the Norwegian government, and
King Christian VII conferred city status to several settlements, such as
Tromsø, to facilitate it.[2] Norwegians mainly traded fish for flour and wheat
from Russians. The trading went on throughout the sunny months of the year and
was beneficial to both sides; Norwegians had access to cheap fish in the
summer, whilst Russians had surplus wheat.[3] Traders came from the areas near
Murmansk and the White Sea, most often to Vardø, Hammerfest, and Tromsø,
sometimes reaching as far south as Lofoten.[3][4]

The earliest recorded instance of Russenorsk was in 1785.[5] It is one of the
most studied northern pidgins; many linguists, for example, Olaf Broch,
studied it. Unlike equatorial pidgins, it was formed from only two languages:
Norwegian and Russian. Furthermore, these languages are not from the same
branch of Indo-European languages. Also unlike equatorial pidgins, Russenorsk
was formed from one social class.[6]

Until 1850, Russenorsk was socially acceptable for all social classes. In
1850, Russenorsk became more limited to Norwegian fishermen, whereas Norwegian
traders spent more time in Russia, often formally studying the language to the
extent that they could communicate in rudimentary Russian.[3] This caused
Russenorsk to lose some of its prestige.[7]

In 1917, Finland's declaration of independence from Russia caused the
Russian–Norwegian border to decrease significantly. In 1919, the border
disappeared completely.[5] Furthermore, the Soviet Union limited international
contact significantly, decreasing the need for the common language between
Norwegians and Russians. The last such Norwegian–Russian trade occurred in
1923.[5]

Russenorsk uses many of the phonemes mutual to Norwegian and Russian, altering
phonemes only used in one.[5][8][9]

One of the characteristics differentiating the pidgin from jargon is its
grammar.[3] Russenorsk is mainly influenced by Norwegian grammar, leading some
to conclude that it is a variant of Norwegian with some Russian influence.[10]

There are no clear verb conjugations. The main indication of a verb is the
suffix _-om_ , for example, _kapitan på kajuta slipom_ (the captain is asleep
in his cabin). Nominative nouns usually end with _-a_.[10] Conjunctions used
to make compound sentences or dependent clauses are _ja_ , _i_ , and _jes_.
_Kak_ is used as an interrogative word. The general word order is SVO, with
some alterations for questions and sentences with adverbs.[8]

_På_ is used as the only preposition for the oblique case:[5]

Corpora of Russenorsk consist of lists of individual words and phrases as well
as records of dialogues compiled by linguists such as Just Knut Qvigstad. The
corpora include c. 400 words, about half of those only appear once in the
records (so-called hapax legomena).[3][11]

The origin of its vocabulary is generally held to be approximately 40% Russian
and 50% Norwegian, with the remaining 10% from Dutch, Low German, French,
English, Sami, and Swedish. [5][7]

Many words in Russenorsk have a synonym from the other primary language.[8]

Some words can be etymologically traced to both Norwegian and Russian, for
example, _vin_ (Norwegian) and вино (Russian). Some words have an unclear
etymology, for example, _tovara_ or _vara_ can come from Russian, Swedish, or
Finnish.[8]

Some Russenorsk words survive in the dialect of Vardø:[3]

Russenorsk does not have extensive morphology, but has some unique
characteristics. The ending _-om_ does not come from Russian nor Norwegian,
but it may come from Solombala English.[3] The ending _-mann_ , from
Norwegian, is used to indicate nationality or profession, for example
_russmann_ (Russian), _burmann_ (Norwegian), or _kukmann_ (trader). Other
morphological features are reduplication, such as _morra-morradag_ (after
tomorrow), and compounding, such as _kua_ (cow) and _sjorta_ (shirt) to
_kuasjorta_ (cowhide).[5]

One characteristic syntactical attribute of Russenorsk is the tendency to move
the verb to the final position when the sentence has adverbs. This is found in
neither Russian nor Norwegian.[3] Another is that the negator ( _ikke_ ,
_njet_ ) precedes the verb, but can be separated from the verb. This is unlike
negation in either Russian or Norwegian, but it may have come from Finnish, in
which this syntax was probable.[8]

A lack of metalinguistic awareness amongst Russenorsk speakers may have led
them to believe they were speaking the language of their interlocutor; that
is, that Russians believed they were speaking Norwegian and vice versa.[10]

R marks Russian origin, N marks Norwegian.

