**Ryan James Howard** (born November 19, 1979), nicknamed " **The Big Piece**
", is an American former professional baseball first baseman. Howard spent his
entire Major League Baseball (MLB) career playing for the Philadelphia
Phillies, from 2004 to 2016. He is known for being the fastest player in
baseball history to reach 1,000 RBIs, 100 home runs, and 200 home runs. Howard
also holds numerous Phillies franchise records.

Howard made his MLB debut in 2004. He won the National League (NL) Rookie of
the Year Award in 2005 and the NL Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award in 2006.
Howard was a three-time NL All-Star (2006, 2009, 2010), and won the Silver
Slugger Award, Hank Aaron Award, and the NL Championship Series MVP Award in
2009. Known for his power, Howard is a member of the 50 home run club. He was
a two-time NL home run champion (2006, 2008), and became the fastest player to
reach both the 100 and 200 home run milestones in MLB history, passing the
marks in 2007 and 2009, respectively. He is also tied with Sammy Sosa for the
most National League 140 RBI seasons at 3 and the most National League 130 RBI
seasons at 4.[1] However, Howard is Major League Baseball’s (ignominious) all-
time record-holder for most lifetime Golden Sombrero awards.

Howard was born in St. Louis. He attended Lafayette High School in Wildwood,
Missouri, and Missouri State University, where he played college baseball for
the Bears from 1998 to 2001. Howard finished his collegiate career with 50
home runs, 183 runs batted in (RBIs), and a .335 career batting average in 172
games played. He was the 1999 Missouri Valley Conference Freshman of the Year.
Missouri State retired Howard's number on December 18, 2010. He played one
summer in the Central Illinois Collegiate League, a league partially funded by
Major League Baseball (MLB) for future prospects to develop.[2]

The Philadelphia Phillies selected Howard in the fifth round of the 2001 draft
and assigned him to the Batavia Muckdogs of the NY-Penn League. Howard
ascended the Phillies' minor league system, earning consecutive awards in the
Florida State League and Eastern League leagues in 2003 and 2004,
respectively. Howard also set the single-season home run record for the
Reading Phillies, with 37 in 102 games.[3][4] On July 31, he was promoted to
the Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Red Barons of the Class AAA International League.[4]
He became just the fifth minor league player since 1956 to hit at least 46
home runs. He was named by Major League Baseball one of the best first basemen
in Philadelphia Phillies History.[4] Howard won the Joe Bauman Home Run Award
in the process.[5] While doing this, he impressed scouts enough that general
managers of several teams tried to lure the Phillies' Ed Wade into trading
him, as Jim Thome was blocking his path to the majors.[ _citation needed_ ]

On September 1, Howard made his first Major League plate appearance, striking
out against Jaret Wright in a pinch-hit at-bat (for Vicente Padilla) in a 7–2
loss to the Atlanta Braves. On September 6, Howard logged his first Major
League hit in a single at-bat during a 3–1 loss to the Braves; on September 8,
he recorded his first multi-hit game with a double and a single in a 4–1 win
over the Braves. On September 11, Howard hit his first Major League home run
off Bartolomé Fortunato, driving in his first RBI and scoring his first run in
an 11–9 win over the New York Mets.[ _citation needed_ ]

Howard had 42 plate appearances in 19 games with the Phillies in 2004. He
posted a .282 batting average with two home runs and five RBI; he also hit
five doubles, drew two walks, and was hit by a pitch. Between playing for the
Double-A Reading Phillies, Triple-A Scranton/Wilkes-Barre Red Barons and the
Philadelphia Phillies, Howard hit 48 home runs, which was tied for the highest
total in organized baseball in 2004, along with Adrián Beltré of the Los
Angeles Dodgers.[4]

On May 15, Howard recorded his first three-hit game, going 3-for-4 with a
double, two singles, and a run-scored in a 4–3 win over the Cincinnati Reds.
On July 3, Howard recorded his first three-RBI game, against the Braves. On
August 23, he notched his first four-hit game, going 4-for-5 with a double, a
home run, two singles, three RBI and three runs scored in a 10–2 win over the
San Francisco Giants. On July 1, Howard became the Phillies' everyday first
baseman when Thome was sidelined for the season with an elbow injury.[6]

Howard was named National League (NL) Rookie of the Month in September. He
batted .278 with 10 home runs and 22 runs batted in. In honor of winning the
award, he received a specially-designed trophy.[7]

Howard led all major league rookies with 22 home runs[6] and posted a .288
average and 63 RBI in just 312 at-bats and 88 games. He hit 11 home runs and
27 RBI in September and October. Howard finished his rookie season with 17
doubles, two triples, 52 runs scored, and 100 strikeouts and 63 runs batted in
as the Phillies battled the Houston Astros for the NL wild card until getting
eliminated on the last day of the season. Howard was rewarded for his effort
by being named NL Rookie of the Year, the fourth Phillie to win the award.[6]
He was also voted the _Baseball Prospectus_ Internet Baseball Awards NL Rookie
of the Year and received the NLBM Larry Doby Legacy Award (NL Rookie of the
Year).

After the 2005 season, the Phillies faced a dilemma involving Thome and
Howard. Both were very talented and proven power hitters; Thome was the
biggest free agent player the Phillies signed prior to the 2003 season, but
Howard was the reigning Rookie of the Year and a promising young player.
Before the 2006 season, the Phillies traded Thome for outfielder Aaron Rowand
and minor league pitching prospects Gio González and Daniel Haigwood in order
to make room for Howard.[8]

Howard began the 2006 season as the Phillies' starting first baseman. Howard
hit his first home run of the season on April 3, off the Cardinals' Chris
Carpenter.[9] On April 23, Howard became the first player to hit a home run
into Ashburn Alley at Citizens Bank Park. The home run traveled 496 feet (151
m) and was hit off Sergio Mitre of the Florida Marlins. It was the first of
two Howard hit in the game, the first multi-home run game of his career.[10]
From May 20 to 29, Howard had at least one RBI in nine consecutive games.
During that stretch, Howard hit six home runs and drove in 17 runs. He also
became the first player to hit a home run into the third deck of the park in
right field when he connected off Mike Mussina on June 20, a 437-foot (133 m)
long-ball that was again his first of two home runs.[11] To honor the home
run, the Phillies painted a white H on the seat where the ball was caught.[11]
Howard collected seven RBI on the two home runs and a triple in the 9–7 loss,
becoming the first Phillies batter to drive in seven runs since pitcher Robert
Person on June 2, 2002.[12][13]

Howard was named to his first All-Star game at PNC Park in Pittsburgh as a
reserve first baseman, by the player ballot. He participated in the Century 21
Home Run Derby prior to the game, and won the contest with a total of 23 home
runs, defeating the New York Mets' third baseman David Wright in the final
round. Howard was the second consecutive Phillie to win the Derby, with Bobby
Abreu hitting a record 41 home runs in 2005. Howard went 0 for 1 with a
groundout in the All Star Game. On July 30, against the Marlins, Howard tied a
Major League record by walking five times, including an intentional walk in
the eighth inning.[ _citation needed_ ]

From August 25 to 29, Howard hit home runs in four consecutive games; on the
29th, Howard hit his 48th home run of the season to tie Mike Schmidt for the
Phillies single-season record.[14] On August 31, Howard hit a home run into
the upper deck of RFK Stadium to surpass Schmidt as the Phillies' single-
season home run record holder.[15]

On September 3, Howard went 4-for-4 with three home runs and a double in an
8–7 win over the Atlanta Braves, to become the first Philadelphia Phillies
batter and the 24th player in Major League history to hit 50 home runs in a
season. Howard became the first player to reach 50 home runs in a season since
Andruw Jones, who hit 51 home runs the previous year. Reaching 52 home runs in
the game, Howard also broke Ralph Kiner's 1947 record for home runs in a
sophomore season, becoming just the second batter to hit 50 home runs in a
second season. Howard's performance from August 28 to September 3 earned him
NL Player of the Week. During that span, Howard batted .571 with six home runs
and 12 runs batted in. On September 5, Howard was named the NL Player of the
Month for August. His 41 runs batted in were the most any player had in one
month since Frank Howard had 41 in July 1962. With 14 home runs, he also set
new franchise records for both statistics in the month of August. On September
22, Howard became the 8th player in history to hit 58 home runs in a season,
belting a three-run round-tripper off Marlins pitcher Ricky Nolasco. On
September 22, Howard became the first hitter to drive in 140 runs since David
Ortiz in 2005. On September 27, in a game against the Nationals, Howard walked
for the 100th time in the ninth inning. He was also be walked intentionally in
the eleventh and thirteenth inning. Howard became the first Phillies' batter
to walk 100 or more times since Thome in 2004.[ _citation needed_ ]

Howard finished the 2006 season with a .313 batting average, 58 home runs, and
149 runs batted in. He also set the Phillies' franchise record with 37
intentional walks. Howard and Ortiz were the only hitters to hit 50 or more
home runs that season. Howard's 58 home runs was the most by a player in his
sophomore season. In the process, Howard became the first Phillies' batter to
win the home run title since Jim Thome did it in 2003.[ _citation needed_ ]

On October 2, Howard was named the NL Player of the Month for September.
Howard, who also won the award in August, became the first player since Albert
Pujols in May and June 2003, to win the award back-to-back.[ _citation needed_
]

On October 10, Howard was named _The Sporting News_ 2006 Player of the Year.
On October 25, Howard was awarded the 2006 NL Hank Aaron Award.[ _citation
needed_ ]

On November 8, Howard was named by his fellow major league players as the
Player of the Year and the National League Outstanding Position Player in the
2006 Players Choice Awards balloting. He succeeded Atlanta Braves outfielder
Andruw Jones, the 2005 winner of both awards. On the same day, following a 5–3
win over Nippon Professional Baseball that capped a five-game international
sweep by the MLB in the Major League Baseball Japan All-Star Series, Howard
was named the Series MVP; he hit .558 with eight runs, three doubles, four
homers and eight RBI. On November 10, Howard was awarded the National League
Silver Slugger Award at first base.[ _citation needed_ ]

On November 20, Howard won the National League MVP award, and became one of
four players in baseball history to win the Rookie of the Year and MVP awards
in consecutive seasons, joining Cal Ripken, Jr and later joined by Dustin
Pedroia and Kris Bryant.

Howard received the Babe Ruth Home Run Award for leading MLB in home runs.[16]
He also received the Pride of Philadelphia Award from the Philadelphia Sports
Hall of Fame.

Howard received the NLBM Oscar Charleston Legacy Award (NL MVP) and the NLBM
Josh Gibson Legacy Award (NL home-run leader).[ _citation needed_ ]

The Philadelphia Baseball Writers' Association of America awarded him the
third annual Mike Schmidt Most Valuable Player honor.[17]

On March 2, 2007, the Phillies renewed Howard's contract in a one-year deal
for $900,000, the highest salary ever offered to a player not eligible for
salary arbitration.[18]

On May 9, Howard hit his fourth career grand slam, against Arizona
Diamondbacks pitcher Brandon Medders, when he came into the game as a pinch
hitter for Wes Helms. On May 13, Howard was placed on the disabled list with a
left quadriceps strain after missing five straight games. Howard fielded
grounders for about 45 minutes before the Phillies game with the Toronto Blue
Jays on May 20. Howard returned to the lineup on May 25, after a
rehabilitation assignment with the class A Lakewood team as a designated
hitter. He hit a home run in his first at-bat there. On May 27, he hit two
home runs in a win that helped the Phillies sweep the Braves.[ _citation
needed_ ]

On June 27, Howard hit a 461-foot (141 m) home run,[19] and became the fastest
player in Major League Baseball history to hit 100 home runs.[20] The
accomplishment was achieved in only 325 games, 60 games fewer than the 385
games that Ralph Kiner needed to hit his first 100 home runs from 1946 to
1948.

Though Howard did not compete in the 2007 MLB All-Star Game, he was chosen to
compete in the 2007 Major League Baseball Home Run Derby for the second
straight year in order to defend his title. However, Howard only hit three
home runs in the first round and did not advance.[ _citation needed_ ]

After coming back from the DL, Howard had a "power surge", as he quickly
climbed to second on the home run leaders list in the National League. On July
25, Howard hit a walk-off home run in the 14th inning to give the Phillies a
victory over the Washington Nationals.[ _citation needed_ ]

Howard had his first career stolen base on August 21, 2007, vs. the Los
Angeles Dodgers.[ _citation needed_ ]

On September 17, Howard hit two home runs, which gave him his 39th and 40th
home run of the season.[ _citation needed_ ]

On September 27, Howard established a new major league record by striking out
for his 196th and 197th time, breaking the old record of 195 (he tied it on
September 23), set by Adam Dunn in 2004.[21] He ended the season with 199
strikeouts, striking out an NL-highest 37.6% of the time.[22]

Howard's final 2007 season totals were a .268 average, with 47 home runs and
136 runs batted in, helping the Phillies win the National League East title on
the final day of the season to earn their first postseason berth since the
1993 World Series. The Phillies were swept by the Colorado Rockies (who had
won a one-game playoff against the San Diego Padres for the NL Wild Card) in
the 2007 National League Division Series; Howard homered off Jeremy Affeldt in
Game Two, but struck out seven times in his other 11 at-bats.[ _citation
needed_ ]

On February 21, 2008, Howard won an arbitration case against the Phillies, and
was awarded $10 million, the most ever for a victorious player and tied for
the most ever awarded. The Phillies had offered $7 million to Howard in
salary.[23]

Howard began the 2008 season in a slump, finishing the month of April with a
batting average of just .172 and going 2-for-25 to close out the month. He
fared better in May, averaging .238 with ten home runs and 30 RBI for the
month, and finishing out May just north of the Mendoza Line with an overall
batting average of .205. Howard hit his 15th home run of the season in a 7–3
loss to the Florida Marlins on May 30, and teammate Chase Utley hit his 15th
homer on May 25. The two became the first pair of Phillies to hit 15 home runs
each before June.[24]

On June 13, Howard hit two home runs and had five RBI, in a 20–2 win over the
St. Louis Cardinals. This included the second of a first-inning set of back-
to-back-to-back Philadelphia home runs. It was the seventh time that the
Phillies had hit three consecutive home runs, the first since May 18,
2004,[25] and the fourth occurrence by any team in the 2008 Major League
Baseball season.[26][27][28] On June 16, Howard again hit two home runs and
drove in four in an 8–2 win over the Boston Red Sox for his 15th career multi-
homer game; the four-day span between multi-homer games was the shortest of
his career.[29] In stark contrast, Howard went 0-for-4 the next night with
four strike outs in a 3–0 loss for his tenth career golden sombrero.[30]
Howard drove in his 100th run of the 2008 season on August 11, against the Los
Angeles Dodgers, marking his third consecutive season with at least 100
RBI.[31]

Howard finished the 2008 season with 146 RBI and a .251 batting average. His
contributions again helped lead the Phillies to the division title and the
post-season. Against Milwaukee in the first round he batted a mere .182 and
only drove in one run. Things picked up as he delivered with a .300 batting
average against the Dodgers in the next round, although he only delivered two
RBI and still remained in his home run drought in the post-season. However, as
the Phillies advanced to the World Series he finally started delivering
significantly with six RBI, .286 batting average, and three home runs (which
tied Donn Clendenon's 1969 World Series record for most home runs in a five-
game Series)[32] – two of which came in game 4 (in which he also drove in five
runs) as the Phillies took a commanding 3–1 series lead. The Phillies
eventually won the series in five games to bring the Phillies their first
World Series championship since 1980, and Philadelphia their first major
sports championship since 1983; he finished second in the voting for the 2008
NL MVP award, behind Albert Pujols of the St. Louis Cardinals.[33] Howard won
his second Babe Ruth Home Run Award and his second Josh Gibson Legacy Award,
leading MLB with 48 home runs.[34][35]

On February 8, the Phillies and Howard agreed on a 3-year, $54 million
contract that bought out his remaining three years of salary arbitration
eligibility.[36] In spring training, Howard led all players in home runs, with
10.[37]

On May 4, Howard hit his second grand slam of the year, the seventh in his
career, against the St. Louis Cardinals at Busch Stadium.[38] On May 30, he
hit his third grand slam of the season off of Washington Nationals pitcher
Shairon Martis. The grand slam landed in the third deck in the first row above
the Powerade sign in right field at Citizens Bank Park, and was estimated at
475 feet (145 m). The grand slam put Howard ahead of Mike Schmidt, who had 7
grand slams in his career, putting him first all-time in Phillies franchise
history.[39]

Howard was named to the 2009 National League All-Star team and also competed
in the Home Run Derby.[40]

On June 20, Howard was checked into the hospital early that morning with a 104
degree fever, but pinch-hit later that day, hitting a home run.[41] A month
later, against the Florida Marlins on July 16, Howard hit his 200th career
home run, making him the fastest player ever to that mark. It took Howard 658
games to reach 200 long-balls, beating out the previous titleholder, Ralph
Kiner (706 games).[42]

In August, Howard hit 11 home runs with 33 runs batted in, after just six the
month before. On August 24, in a game against the New York Mets, Howard went 2
for 5 with 2 home runs and 5 runs batted in. Howard also recorded his 100th
runs batted in of the season. This marked the fourth consecutive season that
Howard had reached the 100 runs batted in mark. His batting average in the
month was .299, raising his overall average to .275. He was named the NL
Player of the Month for these achievements. Howard was named NL Player of the
Week on August 31. Howard hit 5 home runs, 12 runs batted in, 28 total bases,
and a 1,000 slugging percentage during that stretch. On September 18, in a
game against the Braves, Howard hit his 39th and 40th home run of the season.
This marked the fourth time in his career that he had hit 40 or more home runs
in a season.[ _citation needed_ ] On October 3, Howard hit his 45th home run
of the season and became only the fourth player in Major League Baseball
history (joining Babe Ruth from 1926–1931, Ken Griffey Jr. from 1996–1999,[43]
and Sammy Sosa from 1998–2001) to amass at least 135 RBI and 45 home runs in
four consecutive seasons.[44]

Howard ended the season tied with Milwaukee Brewers first baseman Prince
Fielder for the major league lead in RBI with 141.

In the 2009 National League Division Series (NLDS) against the Colorado
Rockies, Howard hit a game-tying double with two outs in the top of the ninth
off of closer Huston Street. Howard scored the winning run on a Jayson Werth
single. After tying Lou Gehrig's record for the most consecutive postseason
games with an RBI, Howard won the NLCS MVP award on October 21.[45] However,
Howard struggled against the New York Yankees during the 2009 World Series,
surpassing Willie Wilson's record by striking out 13 times in the series.[46]

On April 26, 2010, Howard signed a 5-year, $125 million extension with a club
option to the contract he inked before the 2009 season.[47] He was also the
first designated hitter in a NL ballpark during a regular-season game when the
Phillies played as the road team against the Toronto Blue Jays in Citizens
Bank Park on June 25. Major League Baseball moved the interleague series to
Philadelphia due to the G-20 Summit taking place near the Rogers Centre in
Toronto.[48]

On August 1, Howard sprained his ankle while returning to second base on a
baserunning play, and was placed on the 15-day disabled list.[49]

On August 24, Howard was ejected in the 14th inning by 3rd base umpire Scott
Barry for arguing a check swing strikeout. With no position players left the
Phillies had to use a pitcher to replace Howard.

On September 8, Howard hit his 250th home run in only 855 games,[50] which
surpassed Ralph Kiner as the quickest player in history to reach that
milestone.

On September 18, Howard hit his 30th homer of the season, setting a franchise
record with five consecutive 30-homer, 100-RBI seasons. He had been tied with
Chuck Klein, who had four consecutive 30-homer, 100-RBI seasons from 1929 to
1932.[51] On defense, he led all major league first basemen in errors for the
third year in a row, with 14.[52]

Howard was listed with teammates Chase Utley, Jamie Moyer, and Roy Halladay as
one of the few active players that is likely to be considered for the Hall of
Fame.[53]

Through 2011, Howard was fourth among all active major leaguers in career
slugging percentage (.560; behind Albert Pujols, Alex Rodriguez and Ryan
Braun), and ninth in career intentional walks. During the 2011 season, Howard
had a batting average of .253, 33 home runs and 116 RBI. It was his sixth
consecutive 30 home run and 100 RBI season, a Phillies franchise record.[
_citation needed_ ]

In Game 5 of the 2011 NLDS vs the St. Louis Cardinals, Howard was the last
batter to ground out before the Phillies lost the series. Howard tore his
Achilles tendon when running to first base on the final play of the game, a
ground out to the second baseman, Nick Punto. His injury required surgery and
as a result, he missed the start of the 2012 season.[54]

Howard began the 2012 season on the 15-Day DL. He said in a podcast in early
June that his Achilles tendon injury is "progressing at a positive pace".[
_citation needed_ ]

On July 6, 2012, Howard was activated for his first game of the 2012 season,
in which he went 2-for-4 with a double in a 5-0 Phillies loss.[ _citation
needed_ ] Howard hit his 300th career home run on September 22;[ _citation
needed_ ] his season ended one week later on September 29 after suffering a
small fracture in his big right toe. He finished the 2012 season with a .219
batting average, 14 home runs, and 56 RBI in 71 games.[ _citation needed_ ]

On July 8, 2013, Howard went on the disabled list, missing 6–8 weeks with a
torn left meniscus. He underwent arthroscopic surgery to repair the tear and
did not play for the remainder of the season. He was hitting .266, with 11
home runs and 43 RBI, at the time of his injury.[55]

Howard entered the 2014 season feeling rejuvenated, and looking to utilize the
whole field, rather than exclusively pull the ball, as he had done in recent
years.[56] After reaching base in his first three at bats on opening day,[57]
Howard batted in the fifth position in the Phillies' second game during which
they faced a left-handed pitcher; it ended a streak of 665 starts for Howard
in which he batted in the fourth position.[58]

On May 31, Howard hit a three-run home run for the 1,000th RBI of his career
in an eventual loss to the New York Mets. Howard became the fastest player in
MLB history to 1,000 RBI, accomplishing the feat in only 1,230 games.[59] In
153 games of the 2014 year, Howard struck out an MLB-leading 190 times while
batting .223 with 23 home runs and 95 RBI.[60]

In 2015, Howard batted merely .229, and his 23 HR, 77 RBI and 138 strikeouts
led the last-placed Phillies, even though he missed the last three weeks of
the season due to a left knee injury.[61] He had the lowest batting average
against left-handers among all MLB hitters (60 or more plate appearances), at
.130.[62]

Howard began the 2016 season with a protracted slump; by late May, with his
batting average at .161 after 39 games and with the arrival of a young
promising first baseman in Tommy Joseph, baseball pundits asserted that the
Phillies should consider simply releasing Howard and let the 36-year-old
retire.[63][64] On June 1, manager Pete Mackanin announced his plans to keep
Howard on the bench so as to give Joseph, a rookie, more playing time at first
base.[65] Howard hit his 375th home run on August 16, 2016, versus the
Dodgers. In 112 games of 2016, Howard finished with a .196 batting average, 25
home runs, and 59 RBI. On November 2, the Phillies declined the option for
Howard that had a $23 million deal for the upcoming season, making him a free
agent for the first time of his career.[66]

On April 6, 2017, Howard signed with the Atlanta Braves in a minor-league
contract. Howard started with Braves extended spring training in Florida
before he was assigned to the Gwinnett Braves of the International League. If
he was added to the 40-man roster, he would have received a $120,000 minor-
league salary or a $750,000 major-league salary, plus potential bonuses based
on plate appearances.[67] Braves general manager John Coppolella explained
that Howard's signing was "just a no-risk proposition for a player with good
makeup who was excellent in the second half last season, he's in good shape
and has been training and waiting for an opportunity."[68] However, he hit
just .184 with one home run and 11 strikeouts in 42 plate appearances for
Gwinnett, and was released on May 8.[69]

On August 12, 2017, Howard agreed to a minor league contract with the Colorado
Rockies and was assigned to the Triple-A Albuquerque Isotopes.[70] He elected
free agency on November 6, 2017. On September 4, 2018, Howard announced his
retirement[71] by publishing an article on The Players' Tribune.[72]

In February 2019, Howard joined ESPN as an analyst for _Baseball Tonight_.[73]

Howard has a fraternal twin brother named Corey,[74] as well as an older
brother and a sister. He says he is the smallest of the Howard sons. His
favorite baseball team growing up was the St. Louis Cardinals. Howard has a
son named Darian Alexander, who was born January 26, 2001.[75] Howard
graduated from Lafayette High School (Wildwood, St. Louis County, Mo.) in
1998, where he played trombone. While attending Missouri State University he
became a member of Phi Beta Sigma fraternity and his line name was "Blue
Hurt". Howard is a representative for a number of products including Under
Armour and the Subway restaurant chain.[76] He also appeared on the cover of
_MLB 08: The Show_.[77][78]

Howard appeared alongside teammate Chase Utley as himself on the 2010 episode
of _It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia_ "The Gang Gets Stranded in the Woods".
He also appeared as himself during the 7th season of _Entourage_ in the
episode "Lose Yourself" and appeared in the final season of _The Office_ ; set
in Scranton and created during his time in Triple-A there. Howard is the
acknowledged namesake of one of the show's characters, who in one episode
claimed to be "Ryan Howard, the baseball player" in an attempt to gain entry
into a New York nightclub.

Howard married former Philadelphia Eagles cheerleader Krystle Campbell in Maui
on December 1, 2012.[79][80]

A longstanding lawsuit between Howard and his family over finances was settled
in November 2014.[81]

In May 2017, Howard announced his new role as Partner at SeventySix Capital, a
Philadelphia-based venture capital firm led by Wayne Kimmel and Jon
Powell.[82]

The sale of Howard's palatial beachfront mansion in Belleair Shore, Florida,
for $16.5 million was announced on January 30, 2019.[83]

On April 6, 2019, Howard announced he and his wife are expecting a girl. [84]

Howard has written six children's books with co-authors Erwin Madrid and his
wife, Krystle Howard, published by Scholastic.[85]

On January 5, 2016, it was announced that Howard had filed a lawsuit suing Al
Jazeera for defamation following the publication's release of the documentary
_"The Dark Side: Secrets of the Sports Dopers"_, which linked Howard and
Washington Nationals infielder Ryan Zimmerman, among others, to a clinic that
allegedly distributed steroids and HGH. Zimmerman also filed suit against Al
Jazeera for defamation.[86]

