**Saintonge** (French pronunciation: ​[sɛ̃tɔ̃ʒ]), historically spelled
**Xaintonge** and **Xainctonge** , is a former province of France located on
the west central Atlantic coast. The capital city was Saintes (Xaintes,
Xainctes). Other principal towns include Saint-Jean-d'Angély, Jonzac,
Frontenay-Rohan-Rohan, Royan, Marennes, Pons, and Barbezieux-Saint-Hilaire.
The borders of the province slightly shifted through history, and some
mapmakers, such as Nicolas Sanson (1650), Johannes Blaeu (1662), and Bernard
Antoine Jaillot (1733), show it extending into Cognac, traditionally part of
Angoumois, and to the parishes of Braud-et-Saint-Louis and Étauliers, part of
the Pays Gabay on the right bank of the Gironde River.

Today, four fifths of the historical Saintonge province occupies the modern
_département_ of Charente-Maritime. Most of the other fifth is in Charente,
and a small section extends north into Deux-Sèvres, all within the
administrative region of Nouvelle-Aquitaine.

The province derives its name from the _Santones_ , an ancient Gallic tribe
that once inhabited the area. During antiquity, Saintonge was part of the
Roman province of Gallia Aquitania, and Saintes became its first capital. The
region fell under the control of the kings and dukes of Aquitaine, the counts
of Anjou, then the counts of Poitiers, before becoming integrated for
centuries in the new Duchy of Aquitaine. Occupying the frontier between
Capetian and Plantagenet-controlled areas during the late Middle Ages, between
1152 and 1451, it was the site of constant struggles between lords torn
between their allegiance to Anglo-Aquitaine and those linked to Paris.

Saintonge was primarily attached to Anglo-Aquitaine until the mid-fourteenth
century. However, errors by Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster and
Edward, the Black Prince gradually contributed to weakening English power, and
the province ultimately came under the control of the King of France, Charles
VII, "the Victorious", in 1451.

Saintonge was the birthplace of French explorer Jean Allefonsce (or Alfonse)
in 1484, and Samuel de Champlain in 1574, who explored the New World and
founded Quebec.[1] It also was one of the centers of French Huguenots,
Protestants.

The distinctive Saintongeais dialect (patouê saintonjhouê, jhabrail) was once
spoken throughout Saintonge, as well as in the provinces of Aunis and
Angoumois.

The region is famous for its grapes, which are used to produce cognac and
Pineau des Charentes.

This area is famous for its medieval pottery, which was widely exported.
Shards of it have been found in large quantities in medieval excavations
throughout Ireland and other European countries. These shards are from vessels
made and exported as a by-product of the Bordeaux wine trade (Deroeux and
Dufournier, 1991). This ware has been found on Irish excavations from the
later 12th century but it is most commonly uncovered in 13th-century contexts.
They consist of an off-white micaceous fabric with moderate amounts of quartz
and sparse inclusions of haematite. They are glazed on the external surface
only, with a clear lead glaze. In Saintonge Green wares, the addition of
copper filings, or copper oxide to the clear lead glaze, produced a mottled
mid-green colouring. Many forms of Saintonge wares were produced, including
Saintonge Polychrome, Saintonge Green, and in some cases unglazed wares.
Slipped Saintonge is more consistent in colour and appearance than unslipped,
having the benefit of an undercoating to regulate the process.

The most common forms of vessel produced in this ware were wine jugs. These
were characteristically tall, with slightly ovoid bodies, flat bases, parrot-
beak spouts and strap handles.

Saintonge was exported well through the 17th century. Acadians and French
colonists in Quebec and Eastern Canada imported many Saintonge ceramics,
including bowls, plates, mugs and other types. Many Saintonge ceramic
fragments have been found in context with 17th-century colonists and are often
used as evidence of pre-British occupation of these areas.

