**Sam's Chicken** is a British fast food chain. It has 34 outlets, the
majority of which are in west and north west London.[1][2] It was founded in
1990 by Sri Lankan Sam Chandrasinghe, with the opening of its first restaurant
in Wealdstone, Harrow, north west London. Chandrasinghe had previously worked
for KFC UK as deputy operations director.

Sam's Chicken's food is produced with 100% rapeseed oil, meaning healthier
fast food, and its London stores were certified with the ‘Healthier Catering
Commitment for London’.[3] Their products are also halal certified.[4] Sam's
Chicken pioneered the two burgers for £2 deal, which was revolutionary at the
time.[5]

In March 2012, England cricketer Ravi Bopara opened a new branch in Tooting.
The branch is managed by Bopara's brother Etinder and first cousin Gurinder
and Ravi is believed to be an investor.[2][6] Also in 2012, Sam Chandrasinghe
had approached England cricketer Kevin Pietersen to become the owner of a
branch.[2] In 2014, it was reported that Bopara now owned two branches of
Sam's Chicken, Tooting and East Ham:

"I remember when I was saying it when I was about 14 and I said to my mates
that we're going to own a chicken shop one day because all we used to eat was
chicken, so we wanted to sit and eat our own chicken without having to pay for
it".[7]

In May 2009, the _Evening Standard_ reported that 62 year old Sam
Chandrasinghe said that his staff and shops had been targeted by Tamil youth
as part of a hate campaign due to his Sinhalese background.[8]

In March 2014, _The Guardian_ reported on how food hygiene inspectors found a
small windowless bedroom behind the busy kitchen of a Sam's branch in east
London, and that combined with imported chicken pieces enabled chicken shops
to offer low prices to keep poor consumers happy, even if local councils were
not.[9] In November 2013, Sam's Chicken were fined £1750 by Ealing Council for
fly-tipping of 35 rubbish sacks over seven nights, the shop owner had
previously been fined in 2011.[10]

Apart from its strongholds in west and north west London, there are sporadic
branches around London including: East Sheen, Tooting, Croydon, Mottingham,
Woolwich, East Ham, Tottenham, Holloway, Kentish Town, North Finchley,
Colindale, as well as Borehamwood and Watford. Outside London's orbital M25
motorway, Sam's Chicken has branches in Luton, Birmingham, Wellingborough,
Northampton and the Isle of Wight.

