**Samuel Luther** " **Big Sam** " **Thompson** (March 5, 1860 – November 7,
1922) was an American professional baseball player from 1884 to 1898 and with
a brief comeback in 1906. At 6 feet, 2 inches, the Indiana native was one of
the larger players of his day and was known for his prominent handlebar
mustache. He played as a right fielder in Major League Baseball for the
Detroit Wolverines (1885–1888), Philadelphia Phillies (1889–1898) and Detroit
Tigers (1906). He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1974.

Thompson had a .331 career batting average and was one of the most prolific
run producers in baseball history. His career run batted in (RBI) to games
played ratio of .923 (1,305 RBIs in 1,410 games) remains the highest in major
league history. In 1895, Thompson averaged 1.44 RBIs per game, and his 166
RBIs in 1887 (in only 127 games) remained the major league record until 1921
when Babe Ruth collected 168 (albeit in 152 games). Thompson still holds the
major league record for most RBIs in a single month with 61 in August 1894
while playing for the Phillies. Manager Bill Watkins in 1922 called Thompson
"the greatest natural hitter of all time."

Defensively, Thompson was known to have one of the strongest arms of any
outfielder in the early decades of the game. He still ranks among the all-time
major league leaders with 61 double plays from the outfield (16th all time)
and 283 outfield assists (12th all time). Thompson also had good speed on the
base paths and, in 1889, he became the first major league player to reach 20
home runs and 20 stolen bases in the same season.

Thompson was born in Danville, Indiana, in 1860. He was the fifth of eleven
children born to Jesse and Rebecca Thompson.[1] He was educated at the
Danville Graded School.[2] After reaching adulthood, Thompson became employed
as a carpenter in Danville. He and five of his brothers also played on a local
baseball team known as the Danville Browns.[1][2]

In July 1884, Thompson began his professional baseball career at age 24,
playing for the Evansville, Indiana, team in the Northwestern League. A scout
for Evansville travelled to Danville and was referred to "Big Sam", who was
working on a roof in Stinesville. Thompson was initially reluctant to give up
his carpentry career and travel 150 miles to Evansville, but he ultimately
agreed to give it a try. Unfortunately, the league folded in early August
1884, after only five games.[3] In five games at Evansville, Thompson compiled
a .391 batting average.[4]

Thompson signed with the Indianapolis Hoosiers of the newly formed Western
League in 1885. He compiled a .321 average in 30 games with the Hoosiers.[4]
He was approached by a Union Association team and offered more money, but in a
show of "steadfastness to his word", Thompson refused the offer and remained
with Indianapolis at a pay of $100 per month.[5] The Hoosiers were the
dominant team in the Western League, compiling an .880 winning percentage.[5]

In mid June 1885, the Western League disbanded, and a mad rush developed to
sign the players on the Indianapolis roster,[5] a line-up that included
Thompson, Deacon McGuire, Sam Crane, Chub Collins, Jim Donnelly, Mox McQuery,
Gene Moriarty, and Dan Casey.[6]

Thompson later told the colorful story of his acquisition by Detroit. Detroit
sent two representatives (Marsh and Maloney) to Indianapolis, principally to
sign the Hoosiers' battery of Larry McKeon and Jim Keenan. The Wolverines were
outbid by the Cincinnati Reds for McKeon and Keenan but wound up with the
Hoosiers' manager (Bill Watkins) and the rest of the team's starting lineup.
The only catch was that a 10-day waiting period would allow other teams to
outbid Detroit. Marsh and Maloney promptly sent the players to Detroit and
quartered them in a hotel there. The next morning, the players were told that
the team had arranged a fishing trip for them. The players boarded the
steamship _Annette_ and enjoyed the first day and night of successful fishing.
After three days, the players became suspicious, but the ship captain laughed
when asked when they would return to Detroit. As the players became mutinous
on the sixth day, the captain admitted he had been ordered to keep them "out
at sea" for 10 days.[5] In another account, Thompson described his 10 days
aboard the _Annette_ as follows:

"We were prisoners, but well cared-for prisoners. Anything in the line of
creature comforts you could find packed away on ice. We lived on the best in
the market, and spent the rest of the time in fishing and playing poker, chips
having very thoughtfully been provided. On the night of the tenth day, at
midnight, we were all taken ashore where Watkins met us and signed us to our
contracts."[7]

The players were only later presented with their accumulated mail which
included scores of offers from other clubs.[5] A writer in the _Detroit Free
Press_ later noted: "Detroit magnates showed some inside baseball brains and
great finessing in sending the players away from all tempters for that period
when they belonged to no club."[5]

Regardless of the trickery by Detroit, Thompson considered Detroit to be a
mecca. He recalled his first time in 1885 viewing Woodward Avenue with
Indianapolis teammate Mox McQuery. They gazed with "open-mouth amazement" at
the "wondrous pavements", having never seen a street as "clean and smooth as a
table."[5]

Thompson joined the Wolverines lineup in early July. In his first plate
appearance, he had a hit off New York Giants' Hall of Fame pitcher Tim
Keefe.[5] The Wolverines were in last place when Thompson joined the club, but
won 12 of their first 13 games after Thompson took over in right field.[8]
Thompson compiled a .303 batting average in 63 games. Despite playing only the
second half of his rookie season, Thompson ranked among the National League
leaders with seven home runs (third most in the league) and nine triples (10th
most in the league).[6] Displaying a strong arm that would be one of the main
features of his defensive game, Thompson also ranked fifth in the league with
24 outfield assists in only 63 games.[6]

In 1886, team owner Frederick K. Stearns made a big splash when he purchased
the Buffalo infield that had become known as the "Big Four", consisting of Dan
Brouthers, Hardy Richardson, Jack Rowe, and Deacon White. In addition, Detroit
pitcher Lady Baldwin won 42 games in 1886, a major league record for a left-
handed pitcher. The 1886 season was Thompson's first full season in the
majors. Thompson made a major contribution to the 1886 club as well, compiling
a .310 batting average with 101 runs scored, 13 triples, and eight home runs
in 122 games. His 89 runs batted in (RBIs) ranked third in the National
League. His defensive statistics continued to impress as well. He led the
league with 11 double plays from the outfield, ranked second with a .945
fielding percentage, and was fourth in the league with 194 outfield
putouts.[6] The 1886 Wolverines compiled an impressive 87–36 record (.707
winning percentage), but lost the National League pennant, finishing 2½ games
behind the Chicago White Stockings.[9]

Thompson had his breakout season in 1887 when he won the National League
batting crown with .372 batting average,[10] and he set a major league record
with 166 RBIs.[11] Thompson also led the league in hits (203), triples (23),
slugging percentage (.565), total bases (308), and at bats (545).[6] On May 7,
1887, Thompson became the first player in major league history to hit two
triples with the bases loaded in the same game.[12] The 1887 Detroit
Wolverines featured four future Hall of Fame inductees (Thompson, Dan
Brouthers, Deacon White, and Ned Hanlon) and won the National League pennant
with a 79-45 record.[13] The Wolverines then went on to defeat the St. Louis
Browns of the American Association in a 15-game World Series challenge.
Thompson played in all 15 games of the World Series and led all hitters with a
.362 average, two home runs, seven RBIs and a .621 slugging percentage.[1]

During the 1888 season, Thompson was sidelined with a sore arm during most of
the season and appeared in only 56 games.[14] His batting average declined by
90 points to .282, and the fortunes of the entire 1888 Detroit team followed
suit. The team finished in fifth place with a 68-63 record.[15] With high
salaries owed to the team's star players, and gate receipts declining
markedly, the team folded in October 1888 season with the players being sold
to other teams.

On October 16, 1888, Thompson was purchased from the Wolverines by the
Philadelphia Quakers (known as the Philadelphia Phillies beginning in 1890),
for $5,000 cash (equal to $139,426 today).[6]

In his first season with Philadelphia, Thompson hit .296 and led the National
League with a career-high 20 home runs.[6] He also became the first major
league player to reach 20 home runs and 20 stolen bases (Thompson stole 24
bases) in the same season. Thompson improved his batting average to .313 in
1890 and led the league in both hits (172) and doubles (41).[6] Thompson's
batting average dipped slightly below .300 in 1891 (.294) but bounced back in
1892 to .305. In each of his first four seasons with the Phillies, Thompson
finished among the league leaders in total bases and RBIs. He ranked third in
total bases in 1889 (262), 1890 (243), and 1893 (263), second in RBIs in 1892
(104), and third in RBIs in 1890 (102).[6] He also tallied a career-high 32
outfield assists to lead the National League in 1891.[6] (It has been
suggested that Thompson's assist and home run totals in Philadelphia were
aided by the short 300-foot right field fence at the Huntingdon Street
Grounds.)[16] The Phillies were a good, but not great team, during Thompson's
first four years in Philadelphia, finishing in fourth place in 1889, 1891 and
1892, and in third place in 1890.[17][18][19][20]

From 1893 to 1895, Thompson hit his stride with the Phillies. During those
three years, he hit .390 and averaged 207 hits, 125 runs, 146 RBIs, 21
triples, and 24 stolen bases. And he compiled those numbers while striking out
an average of only 14 times per season.[6] Despite Thompson's contributions,
the Phillies were unable to compete for the National League pennant, finishing
in fourth place in 1893 and 1894 and in third place in 1895.[21][22][23]

Thompson's 1893 totals included a league-leading 222 hits and 37 doubles.[6]
After the 1893 season, Thompson vowed not to return to Philadelphia in protest
over the owners' penny-pinching ways and the team's inability to compete for a
pennant. In October 1893, Thompson announced: "I shall not play again in
Philadelphia, and I told Harry Wright it would be a waste of time for him to
write to me about signing. The cheese-paring methods of the management ...
have been the causes leading to my resolution. ... The management [has] made a
barrel of money, but they grind the players into the dirt."[24] Thompson
finally agreed in March 1894 to return to the Phillies, but only after
management agreed to improve travel accommodations.[24]

In 1894, Thompson was part of the only all-.400-hitting outfield of all-time.
All four Philadelphia outfielders ended the season with a batting average
better than .400 (Tuck Turner at .416, Thompson and Ed Delahanty at .407, and
Billy Hamilton at .404). Thompson missed a month from the 1894 season with an
injury to the little finger on his left hand. Doctors determined that the
smaller bones in the finger were dead, and portions of the finger were
surgically removed in mid-May 1894.[24] Despite the injury and partial
amputation, and being limited to only 102 games, Thompson compiled a .407
batting average with a career-high 28 triples and a league-leading 147
RBIs.[6] His 1894 ratio of 1.44 RBIs per game remains the all-time major
league record.[12] Also, his 28 triples was the second highest total in major
league history up to that time and remains the fifth highest of all time.[25]
Thompson also led the National League with a career-high .696 slugging
percentage,[6] and he hit for the cycle on August 17, 1894.

In 1895, Thompson compiled a .392 batting average with 211 hits in 119 games
and led the National League in slugging percentage (.654), total bases (352),
extra base hits (84), home runs (18), and RBIs (165).[6] His average of 1.39
RBIs per game in 1895 remains second in major league history—trailing
Thompson's 1.44 ratio in 1894. Thompson also continued to perform well
defensively with 31 outfield assists, second most in the league.[6] From June
11 to 21, Thompson had 6 consecutive games with at least 3 or more hits. Since
then, only Jimmy Johnston(June 24–30, 1923) and George Brett(May 8–13, 1976)
had 6 straight games with at least 3 or more hits.

At age 36, Thompson played his last full season of professional baseball in
1896. His average dipped to .298, but he still managed to collect 100 RBIs.
Thompson's throwing remained strong as he turned in one of the finest
defensive performances of his career. Despite appearing in only 119 games in
the outfield, he led the league in outfield fielding percentage (.974),
outfield assists (28), and double plays from the outfield (11).[6] One sports
writer noted that, even at age 38, Thompson "possessed an arm that the fastest
sprinters in the big league had a lot of respect for."[5] As a team, however,
the Phillies fell to eighth place in the National League with a 62-68
record.[26]

In 1897, at age 37, Thompson was sidelined by pain and appeared in only three
games.[12] Some accounts suggest that Thompson's absence from the lineup may
have also been the result of his not getting along with Philadelphia's new
manager George Stallings.[27] Without Thompson, the 1897 Phillies dropped to
10th place with a 55-77 record.[28]

Before the 1898 season began, Thompson gave an interview in which he
questioned the Phillies chances to compete in 1898: "What are the Phillies'
chances this season? Six clubs, Cincinnati Baltimore, Boston, New York,
Cleveland and Brooklyn are bound to beat them, and they will have to fight
hard to lead the second division, and I very much doubt if they can do
that."[29] Though his loyalty to the Phillies was questioned,[29] Thompson did
return in 1898 and was batting .349 with 15 RBIs, five doubles, three triples,
a home run after 14 games. However, Thompson opted to leave the team in May
1898 and return to his home in Detroit. His sudden retirement has been
attributed to a "combination of homesickness and chronic back pain."[12] Other
accounts indicate that continued tension with manager Stallings contributed to
Thompson's decision to retire.[30]

Late in the 1906 baseball season, Thompson briefly returned to the major
leagues as a player for the Detroit Tigers. With starting outfielders Ty Cobb
and Davy Jones out of the Tigers lineup with injuries, Thompson volunteered to
fill in. At age 46, Thompson had remained active, playing baseball for the
Detroit Athletic Club and other local teams. Accordingly, in late August and
early September 1906, he took his old place in right field for Detroit.
Thompson's return to baseball led to an increase in attendance, as "the stands
and bleachers were full of special Thompson delegations."[31] After getting a
hit and two RBIs in his first game, he totaled seven hits, four runs, three
RBIs and a triple in eight games with the Tigers.[6] At age 46, he became, and
remains, the oldest player to hit a triple in the major leagues.[12] Detroit
sports writer Paul H. Bruske noted that Thompson was still able to throw the
ball from deep right field to the plate "on a line" and that he still had "a
lot of speed on the bases."[31][32]

In 15 major league seasons, Thompson compiled a .331 batting average with
1,988 hits, 343 doubles, 161 triples, 126 home runs, 1,305 RBIs, and 232
stolen bases.[6] He was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1974.[6]

Thompson was one of the most prolific run producers in baseball history. His
career RBI to games played ratio of .923 (1,305 RBIs in 1,410 games) remains
the highest in major league history, higher even than Lou Gehrig (.921), Hank
Greenberg (.915), Joe DiMaggio (.885), and Babe Ruth (.884).[12] In 1895,
Thompson averaged 1.44 RBIs per game (147 RBIs in 102 games),[6] still a major
league record. His 166 RBIs in 1887 (in only 127 games) was 62 more than
anyone else in the league that year,[33] and it stood as the major league
record until 1921 when Babe Ruth collected 168 (albeit in 152 games). Thompson
still holds the major league record for most RBIs in a single month with 61 in
August 1894 while playing for the Phillies.[34]

Thompson was also one of the best power hitters of the era before Babe Ruth.
At the end of the 19th century, Thompson's 126 career home runs ranked second
only to Roger Connor. Defensively, Thompson still ranks among the all-time
major league leaders with 61 double plays from the outfield (16th all time)
and 283 outfield assists (12th all time).[35][36] Thompson has also been
credited by baseball historians with perfecting "the art of throwing the ball
to the plate on one bounce, which catchers found easier to handle than the
usual throw on the fly."[16] Bill Watkins, who managed Thompson in Detroit,
recalled: "He was a fine fielder and had a cannon arm and will live in my
memory as the greatest natural hitter of all time."[37]

In a 1913 story on Thompson, Detroit sports writer Maclean Kennedy noted that
Thompson's drives "were the direct cause of more hats being smashed, more
backs that were thumped til they were black and blue by some wild-eyed fan
sitting in the seat behind, more outbursts of frenzied shrieks and howls of
glee, than those of any other player who ever wore a Detroit uniform", barring
only the two great stars of the day, Ty Cobb and Sam Crawford.[5]

Thompson was married in 1888 to Ida Morasha of Detroit. They had no children
and made their home in Detroit until Thompson's death.[1][14] After retiring
from baseball, Thompson invested in real estate and was financially
comfortable in his later years. He was appointed a U.S. Deputy Marshall during
World War I and also worked as the crier in the courtroom of U.S. District
Court Judge Arthur J. Tuttle. He was "well known" and a "well liked" figure at
the federal building in Detroit.[37][38]

Thompson died in 1922 at age 62. He had a heart attack while serving as an
election inspector on November 7 and was stricken again later in the morning
after being taken to his home located at 6468 Trumbull Avenue in Detroit. Upon
learning of Thompson's death, his former Detroit manager Bill Watkins recalled
Thompson as "not only a great baseball player, but as one of the finest
gentlemen I ever knew."[37][39] At Thompson's funeral, "Michigan's foremost
citizens – state and city officials, judges, bankers, doctors, millionaires,
laborers – paid homage ... to their beloved friend", and the neighborhood in
which Thompson lived "was packed with expensive automobiles and their liveried
chauffeurs" as workmen and wealthy men "discussed their favorite player with
an unusual spirit of camaraderie."[40] Thompson was interred at the historic
Elmwood Cemetery in Detroit.[41] He was posthumously inducted into the
Baseball Hall of Fame in 1974.

