The **Sandia National Laboratories** ( **SNL** ), managed and operated by the
National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia (a wholly owned
subsidiary of Honeywell International), is one of three National Nuclear
Security Administration research and development laboratories. In December
2016, it was announced that National Technology and Engineering Solutions of
Sandia, under the direction of Honeywell International, will take over the
management of Sandia National Laboratories starting on May 1,
2017.[4][5][6][2]

Their primary mission is to develop, engineer, and test the non-nuclear
components of nuclear weapons. The primary campus is located on Kirtland Air
Force Base in Albuquerque, New Mexico and the other is in Livermore,
California, next to Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. There is also a
test facility in Waimea, Kauai, Hawaii.[7]

It is Sandia's mission to maintain the reliability and surety of nuclear
weapon systems, conduct research and development in arms control and
nonproliferation technologies, and investigate methods for the disposal of the
United States' nuclear weapons program's hazardous waste. Other missions
include research and development in energy and environmental programs, as well
as the surety of critical national infrastructures. In addition, Sandia is
home to a wide variety of research including computational biology,
mathematics (through its Computer Science Research Institute), materials
science, alternative energy, psychology, MEMS, and cognitive science
initiatives. Sandia formerly hosted ASCI Red, one of the world's fastest
supercomputers until its recent decommission, and now hosts ASCI Red Storm,
originally known as Thor's Hammer. Sandia is also home to the Z Machine. The Z
Machine is the largest X-ray generator in the world and is designed to test
materials in conditions of extreme temperature and pressure. It is operated by
Sandia National Laboratories to gather data to aid in computer modeling of
nuclear weapons.

Sandia National Laboratories' roots go back to World War II and the Manhattan
Project. Prior to the United States formally entering the war, the U.S. Army
leased land near an Albuquerque, New Mexico airport known as Oxnard Field, to
service transient Army and U.S. Navy aircraft. In January 1941 construction
began on the Albuquerque Army Air Base, leading to establishment of the
_Bombardier School-Army Advanced Flying School_ near the end of the year. Soon
thereafter it was renamed Kirtland Field, after early Army military pilot
Colonel Roy C. Kirtland, and in mid-1942 the Army acquired Oxnard Field.
During the war years facilities were expanded further and Kirtland Field
served as a major Army Air Forces training installation.

In the many months leading up to successful detonation of the first atomic
bomb, the Trinity test, and delivery of the first airborne atomic weapon,
Project Alberta, J. Robert Oppenheimer, Director of Los Alamos Laboratory, and
his technical advisor, Hartly Rowe, began looking for a new site convenient to
Los Alamos for the continuation of weapons development – especially its non-
nuclear aspects. They felt a separate division would be best to perform these
functions. Kirtland had fulfilled Los Alamos' transportation needs for both
the Trinity and Alberta projects, thus, Oxnard Field was transferred from the
jurisdiction of the Army Air Corps to the U.S. Army Service Forces Chief of
Engineer District, and thereafter, assigned to the Manhattan Engineer
District. In July 1945, the forerunner of Sandia Laboratory, known as "Z"
Division, was established at Oxnard Field to handle future weapons
development, testing, and bomb assembly for the Manhattan Engineer District.
The District-directive calling for establishing a secure area and construction
of "Z" Division facilities referred to this as "Sandia Base" , after the
nearby Sandia Mountains — apparently the first official recognition of the
"Sandia" name.

Sandia Laboratory was operated by the University of California until 1949,
when President Harry S. Truman asked Western Electric, a subsidiary of
American Telephone and Telegraph (AT&T), to assume the operation as an
"opportunity to render an exceptional service in the national interest."
Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of AT&T Corporation, managed and
operated the laboratory until October 1993. The United States Congress
designated Sandia Laboratories as a National laboratory in 1979. In October
1993, Sandia National Laboratories (SNL) was managed and operated by **Sandia
Corporation** , a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin. As of May 2017,
Sandia National Laboratory is managed by **National Technology and Engineering
Solutions of Sandia** , a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell
International,[4][5][6][2] and includes government-owned facilities in
Albuquerque, New Mexico (SNL/NM); Livermore, California (SNL/CA); Tonopah,
Nevada; and Kauai, Hawaii. SNL/NM is headquarters and the largest laboratory,
employing more than 6,600 employees, while SNL/CA is a smaller laboratory,
with about 850 employees. Tonopah and Kauai are occupied on a "campaign"
basis, as test schedules dictate.

Sandia led a project that studied how to decontaminate a subway system in the
event of a biological weapons attack (such as anthrax). As of September 2017,
the process to decontaminate subways in such an event is "virtually ready to
implement," said a lead Sandia engineer.[8]

On February 13, 2007, a New Mexico State Court found Sandia Corporation liable
for $4.7 million in damages for the firing of a former network security
analyst, Shawn Carpenter, who had reported to his supervisors that hundreds of
military installations and defense contractors' networks were compromised and
sensitive information was being stolen – including hundreds of sensitive
Lockheed documents on the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter project. When his
supervisors told him to drop the investigation and do nothing with the
information, he went to intelligence officials in the United States Army and
later the Federal Bureau of Investigation to address the national security
breaches. When Sandia managers discovered his actions months later, they
revoked his security clearance and fired him.[9]

In 2014 an investigation determined Sandia Corp. used lab operations funds to
pay for lobbying related to the renewal of its $2 billion contract to operate
the lab. Sandia Corp. and its parent company, Lockheed Martin, agreed to pay a
$4.8 million fine.[10]

SNL/NM consists of five technical areas (TA) and several additional test
areas. Each TA has its own distinctive operations; however, the operations of
some groups at Sandia may span more than one TA, with one part of a team
working on a problem from one angle, and another subset of the same team
located in a different building or area working with other specialized
equipment. A description of each area is given below.

TA-I operations are dedicated primarily to three activities – the design,
research, and development of weapon systems; limited production of weapon
system components; and energy programs. TA-I facilities include the main
library and offices, laboratories, and shops used by administrative and
technical staff.

TA-II is a 45-acre (180,000 m2) facility that was established in 1948 for the
assembly of chemical high explosive main charges for nuclear weapons and later
for production scale assembly of nuclear weapons. Activities in TA-II include
the decontamination, decommissioning, and remediation of facilities and
landfills used in past research and development activities. Remediation of the
Classified Waste Landfill which started in March 1998, neared completion in
FY2000. A testing facility, the Explosive Component Facility, integrates many
of the previous TA-II test activities as well as some testing activities
previously performed in other remote test areas. The Access Delay Technology
Test Facility is also located in TA-II.

TA-III is adjacent to and south of TA-V [both are approximately seven miles
(11 km) south of TA-I]. TA-III facilities include extensive design-test
facilities such as rocket sled tracks, centrifuges and a radiant heat
facility. Other facilities in TA-III include a paper destructor, the Melting
and Solidification Laboratory and the Radioactive and Mixed Waste Management
Facility (RMWMF). RMWMF serves as central processing facility for packaging
and storage of low-level and mixed waste. The remediation of the Chemical
Waste Landfill, which started in September 1998, is an ongoing activity in TA-
III.

TA-IV, located approximately 1/2 mile (1 km) south of TA-I, consists of
several inertial-confinement fusion research and pulsed power research
facilities, including the High Energy Radiation Megavolt Electron Source
(Hermes-III), the Z Facility, the Short Pulsed High Intensity Nanosecond
X-Radiator (SPHINX) Facility, and the Saturn Accelerator. TA-IV also hosts
some computer science and cognition research.

TA-V contains two research reactor facilities, an intense gamma irradiation
facility (using cobalt-60 and caesium-137 sources), and the Hot Cell Facility.

SNL/NM also has test areas outside of the five technical areas listed above.
These test areas, collectively known as Coyote Test Field, are located
southeast of TA-III and/or in the canyons on the west side of the Manzanita
Mountains. Facilities in the Coyote Canyon Test Field include the Solar Tower
Facility (34.9623 N, 106.5097 W), the Lurance Canyon Burn Site and the Aerial
Cable Facility.

In the 1970s, the Sandia, Los Alamos, Air Force Weapons Laboratory Technical
Exchange Committee initiated the development of the SLATEC library of
mathematical and statistical routines, written in FORTRAN 77.

Today, Sandia National Laboratories is home to several open-source software
projects:

In addition, Sandia National Laboratories collaborates with Kitware, Inc. in
developing the Visualization Toolkit (VTK), a cross-platform graphics and
visualization software suite.[24] This collaboration has focused on enhancing
the information visualization capabilities of VTK and has in turn fed back
into other projects such as ParaView and Titan.[18][20][24]

On January 30, 2012, Sandia announced that it successfully test-fired a self-
guided dart that can hit targets at 2,000 m (2,187 yd). The dart is 4 in (100
mm) long, has its center of gravity at the nose, and is made to be fired from
a small-caliber smoothbore gun. It is kept straight in flight by four
electromagnetically actuated fins encased in a plastic puller sabot that fall
off when the dart leaves the bore. The dart cannot be fired from conventional
rifled barrels because the gyroscopic stability provided by rifling grooves
for regular bullets would prevent the self-guided bullet from reliably turning
towards a target when in flight, so fins are responsible for stabilizing
rather than spinning. A laser designator marks a target, which is tracked by
the dart's optical sensor and 8-bit CPU. The guided projectile is kept cheap
because it does not need an inertial measurement unit, since its small size
allows it to make the fast corrections necessary without the aid of an IMU.
The natural body frequency of the bullet is about 30 hertz, so corrections can
be made 30 times per second in flight. Muzzle velocity with commercial
gunpowder is 2,400 ft/s (730 m/s) (Mach 2.1), but military customized
gunpowder can increase its speed and range. Computer modeling shows that a
standard bullet would miss a target at 1,000 m (1,094 yd) by 9.8 yd (9 m),
while an equivalent guided bullet would hit within 8 in (20 cm). Accuracy
increases as distances get longer, since the bullet's motions settle more the
longer it is in flight.[25][26][27][28]

Coordinates: 35°03′02″N 106°32′35″W﻿ / ﻿35.050657°N 106.543136°W﻿ / 35.050657;
-106.543136

