**Sarah Jessica Parker** (born March 25, 1965) is an American actress,
producer, and designer.[1][2] She is known for her role as Carrie Bradshaw on
the HBO television series _Sex and the City_ (1998–2004), for which she won
two Emmy Awards, four Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress in a Comedy Series
and three Screen Actors Guild Awards. The character was widely popular during
the airing of the series and was later recognized as one of the greatest
female characters in American television. She later reprised the role in films
_Sex and the City_ (2008) and _Sex and the City 2_ (2010).

Parker made her Broadway debut at the age of 11 in the 1976 revival of _The
Innocents_ , before going on to star in the title role of the Broadway musical
_Annie_ in 1979. She made her first major film appearances in the 1984 dramas
_Footloose_ and _Firstborn_. Her other film roles include _L.A. Story_ (1991),
_Honeymoon in Vegas_ (1992), _Hocus Pocus_ (1993), _Ed Wood_ (1994), _The
First Wives Club_ (1996), _The Family Stone_ (2005), _Failure to Launch_
(2006), _Did You Hear About the Morgans?_ (2009), and _New Year's Eve_ (2011).

In 2012, Parker returned to television for the first time since _Sex and the
City_ , portraying Isabelle Wright in three episodes of the FOX series _Glee_.
She is currently starring as Frances Dufresne in the HBO series _Divorce_
(2016–present), for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award. Since
2005, she has run her own production company, Pretty Matches, which has been
creating content for HBO and other channels.

Sarah Jessica Parker was born in Nelsonville, Ohio, the daughter of Barbara
Parker (née Keck), a nursery-school operator and teacher, and Stephen Parker,
an entrepreneur and journalist.[3][4] She was one of a total of eight children
from her parents' marriage and her mother's second marriage; her full siblings
include actors Timothy Britten Parker and Pippin Parker. Her parents divorced
when she was 3 1/2 years old, and her mother married Paul Forste, a truck
driver and account executive.[5] Parker's father, a native of Brooklyn, is
Jewish (from a family from Eastern Europe);[6][7][8][9] his family's original
surname was "Bar-Kahn" ("son of Kohen").[4][10] Parker's mother is of German,
and some English, descent; through her mother, Parker is descended from Esther
Elwell, one of the accused during the Salem witch trials.[4][11] Parker has
identified culturally with her father's faith, Judaism, although she has had
no religious training. She has said that even while her family lived in
Cincinnati, her mother emulated a New York lifestyle.[10] Parker's parents
struggled to support their large family – oftentimes the electricity could be
shut off, or the family would have to forgo Christmases and birthdays for lack
of money.[5] Nonetheless she has stated that "I wouldn't change any of it, for
anything ... for the most part, we had everything we needed. Not always, but
for the most part."[12] Parker's mother immersed her children in culture and
extracurricular activities; she often took them to free public institutions
like the ballet and the theatre in Cincinnati, so that they lived "full, rich
lives."[12]

As a young girl, Parker trained in singing and ballet, and was soon cast in
the Broadway revival of William Archibald's _The Innocents_.[13] Her family
moved to Cincinnati and then to Dobbs Ferry, New York, near New York City, so
that she could get specialized training. There, her mother and stepfather
helped Parker develop her career as a child actress. In 1977, the family moved
to the newly opened planned community on Roosevelt Island, in the East River
between Manhattan and Queens, and later to Manhattan. The family later moved
to Englewood, New Jersey, where Parker attended Dwight Morrow High School.[14]

Parker attended the School of American Ballet in New York City,[15] the New
York Professional Children's School,[15] the School for Creative and
Performing Arts in Cincinnati,[16] and Hollywood High School in Los
Angeles.[17]

Parker and four siblings appeared in a production of _The Sound of Music_ at
the outdoor Municipal Theatre (Muny) in St. Louis, Missouri.[18] She was
selected for a role in the new 1977–81 Broadway musical _Annie_ : first in the
small role of "July" and then succeeding Andrea McArdle and Shelley Bruce in
the lead role of the Depression-era orphan, beginning March 1979. Parker held
the role for a year. In 1982, Parker obtained the lead role of the CBS sitcom
_Square Pegs_ , which lasted just one season. Her performance as a shy teen
who showed hidden depths, nevertheless, was acclaimed by critics. In the three
years that followed, Parker was cast in four films: the most significant being
_Footloose_ (1984) and _Girls Just Wanna Have Fun_ (1985), with Helen Hunt. In
1986, Parker appeared in _Flight of the Navigator_ , a Disney science fiction
film.[19]

In the romantic comedy _L.A. Story_ (1991), Parker took on the role of a ditzy
aspiring spokesmodel meeting a television meteorologist; both the film and her
performance garnered positive reviews.[13] She would star with Nicolas Cage,
as the girlfriend of a commitment-phobe man, in the film _Honeymoon in Vegas_
(1992), and play one in a villainous trio of witches in the Disney fantasy
family comedy _Hocus Pocus_ (1993), alongside Bette Midler and Kathy Najimy.
_Honeymoon in Vegas_ was a critical and commercial success, while _Hocus
Pocus_ rated average with reviewers and made a modest US$39 million in the
US,[20][21] but became a cult film due to strong DVD sales and large
television following.[22][23] In 1993, she also starred as a police diver
opposite Bruce Willis in the film _Striking Distance_ , and in 1994, she
appeared opposite Johnny Depp in the critically acclaimed biographical drama
_Ed Wood_[13] as the titular character's girlfriend, Dolores Fuller. She
headlined the romantic comedy _Miami Rhapsody_ (1995), playing woman who has
some misgivings about her fiancée and starred in the off-Broadway play
_Sylvia_ , alongside future husband Matthew Broderick.

In 1996, she appeared in another Tim Burton-directed movie, _Mars Attacks!_ ,
in which she made part of a large ensemble cast consisting of Jack Nicholson,
Glenn Close, Pierce Brosnan, among others, portraying a chat-show host whose
head is transposed with that of her chihuahua by the invading aliens. The
romantic comedy _The First Wives Club_ saw Parker take on the role of a dim-
witted but manipulative fiancée, and also reunite with _Hocus Pocus_
collaborator Bette Midler. The film was a critical darling and a major
commercial success, grossing US$105 million at the North American box
office,[24] and it developed a cult following among middle-aged women.[25][26]
Her other 1996 release was _The Substance of Fire_ , in which she reprised her
1991 stage role. In 1997, Parker appeared as a washed-up former child actress
in the little seen comedy _'Til There Was You_.[27]

The script for the HBO dramedy series _Sex and the City_ was sent to Parker.
Set in New York City and based on Candace Bushnell's 1997 book of the same
name, the show follows the lives of a group of four women—three in their mid-
thirties and one in her forties—who, despite their different natures and ever-
changing sex lives, remain inseparable and confide in each other. Its creator
Darren Star wanted her for the project, and despite some doubts about being
cast in a long-term television series, Parker agreed to star. Her role was
that of Carrie Bradshaw, the narrator and main protagonist, with each episode
structured around her train of thought while writing her weekly column "Sex
and the City" for the fictitious paper, the _New York Star_. Response towards
her performance was positive during the show's run and in the years
immediately thereafter. Her character was widely popular during the airing of
the series and was later recognized as one of the greatest female characters
in American television.[28][29][30][31] In 2009, _The Guardian_ named Bradshaw
as an icon of the decade, saying "Carrie Bradshaw did as much to shift the
culture around certain women's issues as real-life female groundbreakers."[32]
Parker received two Emmy Awards, three Screen Actors Guild Awards, and four
Golden Globe Awards for her performance.

In late 2005, Parker reunited with _First Wives Club_ co-star Diane Keaton for
her first film in years, the seasonal family dramedy _The Family Stone_ , in
which she played an uptight, contemporary New York City career woman.[33][34]
James Berardinelli, in his review, wrote: "The talented cast helps. Sarah
Jessica Parker, finding that there is life after _Sex in the City_ , has no
difficulty with [her role]'s arc. Of all the characters in the movie, she
undergoes the biggest transformation, and Parker aces it".[35] Budgeted at
US$18 million, it was a commercial success, grossing over US$92 million
worldwide.[36] For her role, she received a Golden Globe nomination for Best
Actress – Comedy. Her next film was the romantic comedy _Failure to Launch_ ,
starring with Matthew McConaughey as an interventionist hired to get a
35-year-old man out of the home of his parents. It was released on March 10,
2006 and opened atop in the North American box office, grossing over US$24
million on its opening weekend,[37] despite mediocre reviews.[38] Her work as
a producer continued with her next starring vehicle, the independent drama
_Spinning into Butter_ (2007), based on the Rebecca Gilman play.[39] The film
_Smart People_ (2008) premiered at the Sundance Film Festival and saw Parker
portray a sympathetic doctor, opposite Dennis Quaid and Ellen Page.

Following the end of _Sex and the City_ , rumors of a film version circulated,
until preparations for a production were resumed in 2007, and the film was
released on May 30, 2008. A sequel _Sex and the City 2_ , was released in
2010.[40][41] Despite lukewarm critical responses, both films were
commercially successful.[42] In the interim, Parker teamed up with Hugh Grant
for the romantic comedy _Did You Hear About the Morgans?_ (2009), playing a
recently separated New York power couple on the verge of divorce until they
witness the murder of man. While the film was a moderate commercial
success,[43] Parker received a Razzie Award nomination for Worst Actress, and
Roger Ebert, panning the film, noted: "I grant you Hugh Grant and Sarah
Jessica Parker evoke charm in the right screenplay. This is the wrong
screenplay".[44] In 2011, Parker starred in _I Don't Know How She Does It_ ,
described by critics as "[a] limp comedy with a hopelessly outdated viewpoint
on gender, featuring Sarah Jessica Parker in rote Carrie-mode",[45] and also
made part of a large ensemble cast in Garry Marshall's romantic comedy _New
Year's Eve_ (2011), which made US$142 million worldwide.[46] For _Sex and the
City 2_ and her 2011 roles, she garnered nominations for the Razzie Award for
Worst Actress.[47]

Parker guest-starred on season 4 of FOX musical comedy series _Glee_ as
Isabelle Wright, a Vogue executive who takes Kurt Hummel under her wing after
he graduates and moves to New York. _Vulture_ , on one of its recaps of _Glee_
, remarked: "[C]haracters who are big-eyed but a little broken inside and
desperately in love with New York are what Sarah Jessica Parker does best. I
don't think her stint on _Glee_ will revolutionize the show or her career or
anything, but she's absolutely an asset, and I'm glad she's onboard".[48] In
2013, Parker provided her voice for one of the characters of the animated film
_Escape from Planet Earth_ , and played Gloria Steinem in deleted scenes of
the biographical drama _Lovelace_. In 2015, she starred in the independent
romantic comedy _All Roads Lead to Rome_ , as an American journalist
revisiting Italy with her rebellious daughter.

Beginning in 2016, Parker has executive produced and starred in the HBO
dramedy series _Divorce_ , as a married woman who has an affair which
precipitates her divorce. Drawn to the "complexity and promise" of the
story[49] she was also intrigued by the doubtful likeability of her character,
remarking: "I like that Frances is very real to me. She's both honorable and
messy. She's both exacting and untethered, but I think she's a very real
person."[50] The series has run for three seasons and earned acclaim from
critics; _The A.V. Club_ noted: "Parker's gift, even on _Sex and the City_ ,
has always been a well-timed comeback or a reaction shot. [Her character] is
not a reboot of Carrie Bradshaw, but she doesn't exactly force the actor to
stray from her comfort zone, either. That's not necessarily a bad thing: It's
a pleasure to see her back, shaking her head at just the right moment".[51]
For her role, she has earned a Golden Globe nomination. In 2018, Parker
headlined and produced the independent drama _Here and Now_ , playing a New
York City singer who gets a life-changing medical diagnosis.

In 2016, Parker announced an imprint with Crown Publishing Group, SJP for
Hogarth,[52] and in 2017, her partnership with American Library Association
(ALA) to create Book Club Central, a new online platform that will provide
reading resources, including recommendations, expert-curated book lists, and
other content for book clubs and readers.[53]

Parker runs her own production company, Pretty Matches, which has been
creating content for HBO and other channels since 2009.[54][55] She founded
the company in 2005 with Alison Benson, following an introduction to Benson,
from her agent Kevin Huvane, and through it, she has produced the series
_Divorce_ (2016–present) and the film _Here and Now_ (2018). The goal of the
company is to produce more professional opportunities for women. _Divorce_ ,
for instance, has more females than males behind the camera, both in the
director's chair and in the writers' room, which is considered a milestone for
women in comedy.[56]

In 2000, Parker hosted the MTV Movie Awards, appearing in fourteen different
outfits during the show.[57] She has also become the face of many of the
world's biggest fashion brands through her work in a variety of advertising
campaigns. In August 2003, Parker signed a lucrative deal with Garnier to
appear in TV and print advertising promoting their Nutrisse hair products.[58]

In early 2004, shortly after the last season of _Sex and the City_ wrapped up,
Parker signed a $38 million contract with the Gap.[59] It was the first multi-
season contract in the clothing company's history, in which Parker was to
appear in their upcoming fall ads, and continue until the Spring of 2005.[59]
The endorsement sparked many levels of criticism from the public; the
glamorous, urban-chic fashionista that her character Carrie Bradshaw has
branded her with, was ironic considering the Gap maintains an image that does
not promote high-end fashion.[60] Wendy Liebmann, president of WSL strategic
retail, suggested that the Gap "felt the need for an iconic but contemporary
face to represent [themselves]. They were perhaps feeling a little insecure, a
little in need of some high luster around the brand".[59] However, the ad
campaigns were a success, and Parker had given the Gap a new, fresh face that
appeared in many commercials, online and print ads, and other promotions.[61]

In March 2005, Parker's contract with the Gap ended, and was replaced with
then 17-year-old British soul singer Joss Stone. A rising star at the time,
Stone's replacing of Parker was a puzzling move to the public. The company
then stated that "While Gap will always seek partnerships with celebrities,
musicians and rising stars, we don't have any future plans to sign a single
person to a multi-season deal like the unique and special relationship we
enjoyed with Sarah Jessica".[62]

Parker released her own perfume in 2005, called Lovely.[13] In March 2007,
Parker announced the launch of her own fashion line, "Bitten",[63] in
partnership with discount clothing chain Steve & Barry's.[64] The line,
featuring clothing items and accessories under $20, launched on June 7, 2007,
exclusively at Steve and Barry's.[65] In July 2007, following the success of
Lovely, Parker released her second fragrance, Covet. In 2007, Parker was a
guest on _Project Runway_ for the second challenge.[66] In 2008, Covet Pure
Bloom was released as continuous series of Covet.[67] In February 2009, as
part of the Lovely collection, Parker launched a series of three new
fragrances called Dawn, Endless, and Twilight.[68]

On February 28, 2014, Parker started the SJP Collection, a footwear line, at
Nordstrom.[69] She Instagrammed herself overstepping the chain residents on 66
Perry Street put up to prevent overcrowding and unwanted visits to the now-
famous address to promote the line, angering neighbors.[70] In June 2015, she
was named the new spokesmodel for Jordache Jeans.[71] In April 2018, Parker
partnered with Gilt to launch her ready-to-wear bridal collection for modern
nontraditional brides.[72]

Parker was romantically involved with actor Robert Downey, Jr. from 1984 until
1991. They met on the set of _Firstborn_. Downey had a drug problem, which
affected their relationship. Parker has said, "I believed I was the person
holding him together."[73] She later briefly dated John F. Kennedy Jr.[74]

Parker married actor Matthew Broderick on May 19, 1997, in Manhattan's Lower
East Side, in a ceremony officiated by Broderick's sister, Janet Broderick
Kraft, an Episcopal priest.[75] The couple had been introduced by one of her
brothers at the Naked Angels theater company, where they both performed.[76]
The couple married in a civil ceremony in a historic synagogue on the Lower
East Side in Manhattan. The couple's son James was born October 28,
2002.[77][78] Parker and Broderick's twin daughters Marion and Tabitha were
born June 22, 2009, via surrogacy.[79][80] Their respective middle names
Elwell and Hodge are from Parker's mother's family, which she discovered while
researching her ancestry for the first episode of _Who Do You Think You Are?_
, which originally aired March 5, 2010.[81] In the appearance she also
discovered she had ancestors involved in the California Gold Rush of 1849–50
and in the Salem Witch Trials of 1692.

Since 2009, she lives in Greenwich Village with her husband and children.[82]
They are renovating a “double wide” they bought on West 11th Street in
2016.[83]

The family also spends considerable time at their second home near Kilcar, a
village in County Donegal, Ireland, where Broderick spent summers as a
child.[84]

She received ten Emmy Award nominations, all for _Sex and the City_ , winning
Outstanding Comedy Series (as producer) in 2001 and Outstanding Lead Actress
in a Comedy Series in 2004.[85][86][87] She also received nine Golden Globe
nominations, with four wins (all for _Sex and the City_ ) in 2000, 2001, 2002
& 2004.[88] While Carrie Bradshaw remains Parker's most famous role, some of
her critically acclaimed and commercially successful films are:[89]

