**Satellite television** is a service that delivers television programming to
viewers by relaying it from a communications satellite orbiting the Earth
directly to the viewer's location.[1] The signals are received via an outdoor
parabolic antenna commonly referred to as a satellite dish and a low-noise
block downconverter.

A satellite receiver then decodes the desired television programme for viewing
on a television set. Receivers can be external set-top boxes, or a built-in
television tuner. Satellite television provides a wide range of channels and
services. It is usually the only television available in many remote
geographic areas without terrestrial television or cable television service.

Modern systems signals are relayed from a communications satellite on the Ku
band frequencies (12–18 GHz) requiring only a small dish less than a meter in
diameter.[2] The first satellite TV systems were an obsolete type now known as
television receive-only. These systems received weaker analog signals
transmitted in the C-band (4–8 GHz) from FSS type satellites, requiring the
use of large 2–3-meter dishes. Consequently, these systems were nicknamed "big
dish" systems, and were more expensive and less popular.[3]

Early systems used analog signals, but modern ones use digital signals which
allow transmission of the modern television standard high-definition
television, due to the significantly improved spectral efficiency of digital
broadcasting. As of 2018, Star One C2 from Brazil is the only remaining
satellite broadcasting in analog signals, as well as one channel (C-SPAN) on
AMC-11 from the United States.[4]

Different receivers are required for the two types. Some transmissions and
channels are unencrypted and therefore free-to-air or free-to-view, while many
other channels are transmitted with encryption (pay television), requiring the
viewer to subscribe and pay a monthly fee to receive the programming.[5]

Satellite TV is being affected by the cord-cutting trend where people are
shifting towards internet based streaming television.[6]

The satellites used for broadcasting television are usually in a geostationary
orbit 37,000 km (23,000 mi) above the earth's equator. The advantage of this
orbit is that the satellite's orbital period equals the rotation rate of the
Earth, so the satellite appears at a fixed position in the sky. Thus the
satellite dish antenna which receives the signal can be aimed permanently at
the location of the satellite, and does not have to track a moving satellite.
A few systems instead use a highly elliptical orbit with inclination of
+/−63.4 degrees and orbital period of about twelve hours, known as a Molniya
orbit.

Satellite television, like other communications relayed by satellite, starts
with a transmitting antenna located at an uplink facility.[7] Uplink satellite
dishes are very large, as much as 9 to 12 meters (30 to 40 feet) in
diameter.[7] The increased diameter results in more accurate aiming and
increased signal strength at the satellite.[7] The uplink dish is pointed
toward a specific satellite and the uplinked signals are transmitted within a
specific frequency range, so as to be received by one of the transponders
tuned to that frequency range aboard that satellite.[8] The transponder re-
transmits the signals back to Earth at a different frequency (a process known
as translation, used to avoid interference with the uplink signal), typically
in the 10.7-12.7 GHz band, but some still transmit in the C-band (4–8 GHz),
Ku-band (12–18 GHz), or both.[7] The leg of the signal path from the satellite
to the receiving Earth station is called the downlink.[9]

A typical satellite has up to 32 Ku-band or 24 C-band transponders, or more
for Ku/C hybrid satellites.[10] Typical transponders each have a bandwidth
between 27 and 50 MHz.[10] Each geostationary C-band satellite needs to be
spaced 2° longitude from the next satellite to avoid interference; for Ku the
spacing can be 1°.[11] This means that there is an upper limit of 360/2 = 180
geostationary C-band satellites or 360/1 = 360 geostationary Ku-band
satellites.[11] C-band transmission is susceptible to terrestrial interference
while Ku-band transmission is affected by rain (as water is an excellent
absorber of microwaves at this particular frequency).[12] The latter is even
more adversely affected by ice crystals in thunder clouds.[12] On occasion,
sun outage will occur when the sun lines up directly behind the geostationary
satellite to which the receiving antenna is pointed.[13]

The downlink satellite signal, quite weak after traveling the great distance
(see inverse-square law), is collected with a parabolic receiving dish, which
reflects the weak signal to the dish's focal point.[14] Mounted on brackets at
the dish's focal point is a device called a feedhorn or collector.[15] The
feedhorn is a section of waveguide with a flared front-end that gathers the
signals at or near the focal point and conducts them to a probe or pickup
connected to a low-noise block downconverter (LNB).[16] The LNB amplifies the
signals and downconverts them to a lower block of intermediate frequencies
(IF), usually in the L-band.[16]

The original C-band satellite television systems used a low-noise amplifier
(LNA) connected to the feedhorn at the focal point of the dish.[17] The
amplified signal, still at the higher microwave frequencies, had to be fed via
very expensive low-loss 50-ohm impedance gas filled hardline coaxial cable
with relatively complex N-connectors to an indoor receiver or, in other
designs, a downconverter (a mixer and a voltage-tuned oscillator with some
filter circuitry) for downconversion to an intermediate frequency.[17] The
channel selection was controlled typically by a voltage tuned oscillator with
the tuning voltage being fed via a separate cable to the headend, but this
design evolved.[17]

Designs for microstrip-based converters for amateur radio frequencies were
adapted for the 4 GHz C-band.[18] Central to these designs was concept of
block downconversion of a range of frequencies to a lower, more easily handled
IF.[18]

The advantages of using an LNB are that cheaper cable can be used to connect
the indoor receiver to the satellite television dish and LNB, and that the
technology for handling the signal at L-band and UHF was far cheaper than that
for handling the signal at C-band frequencies.[19] The shift to cheaper
technology from the hardline and N-connectors of the early C-band systems to
the cheaper and simpler 75-ohm cable and F-connectors allowed the early
satellite television receivers to use, what were in reality, modified UHF
television tuners which selected the satellite television channel for down
conversion to a lower intermediate frequency centered on 70 MHz, where it was
demodulated.[19] This shift allowed the satellite television DTH industry to
change from being a largely hobbyist one where only small numbers of systems
costing thousands of US dollars were built, to a far more commercial one of
mass production.[19]

In the United States, service providers use the intermediate frequency ranges
of 950–2150 MHz to carry the signal from the LNBF at the dish down to the
receiver. This allows for transmission of UHF signals along the same span of
coaxial wire at the same time. In some applications (DirecTV AU9-S and AT-9),
ranges of the lower B-band[ _ambiguous_ ] and 2250–3000 MHz, are used. Newer
LNBFs in use by DirecTV, called SWM (Single Wire Multiswitch), are used to
implement single cable distribution and use a wider frequency range of 2–2150
MHz.[ _citation needed_ ]

The satellite receiver or set-top box demodulates and converts the signals to
the desired form (outputs for television, audio, data, etc.).[20] Often, the
receiver includes the capability to selectively unscramble or decrypt the
received signal to provide premium services to some subscribers; the receiver
is then called an integrated receiver/decoder or IRD.[21] Low-loss cable (e.g.
RG-6, RG-11, etc.) is used to connect the receiver to the LNBF or LNB.[16]
RG-59 is not recommended for this application as it is not technically
designed to carry frequencies above 950 MHz, but may work in some
circumstances, depending on the quality of the coaxial wire, signal levels,
cable length, etc.[16]

A practical problem relating to home satellite reception is that an LNB can
basically only handle a single receiver.[22] This is because the LNB is
translating two different circular polarizations (right-hand and left-hand)
and, in the case of K-band, two different frequency bands (lower and upper) to
the same frequency range on the cable.[22] Depending on which frequency and
polarization a transponder is using, the satellite receiver has to switch the
LNB into one of four different modes in order to receive a specific
"channel".[22] This is handled by the receiver using the DiSEqC protocol to
control the LNB mode.[22] If several satellite receivers are to be attached to
a single dish, a so-called multiswitch will have to be used in conjunction
with a special type of LNB.[22] There are also LNBs available with a
multiswitch already integrated.[22] This problem becomes more complicated when
several receivers are to use several dishes (or several LNBs mounted in a
single dish) pointing to different satellites.[22]

A common solution for consumers wanting to access multiple satellites is to
deploy a single dish with a single LNB and to rotate the dish using an
electric motor. The axis of rotation has to be set up in the north-south
direction and, depending on the geographical location of the dish, have a
specific vertical tilt. Set up properly the motorized dish when turned will
sweep across all possible positions for satellites lined up along the
geostationary orbit directly above the equator. The disk will then be capable
of receiving any geostationary satellite that is visible at the specific
location, i.e. that is above the horizon. The DiSEqC protocol has been
extended to encompass commands for steering dish rotors.[ _citation needed_ ]

There are five major components in a satellite system: the programming source,
the broadcast center, the satellite, the satellite dish, and the receiver.
"Direct broadcast" satellites used for transmission of satellite television
signals are generally in geostationary orbit 37,000 km (23,000 mi) above the
earth's equator.[23] The reason for using this orbit is that the satellite
circles the Earth at the same rate as the Earth rotates, so the satellite
appears at a fixed point in the sky. Thus satellite dishes can be aimed
permanently at that point, and don't need a tracking system to turn to follow
a moving satellite. A few satellite TV systems use satellites in a Molniya
orbit, a highly elliptical orbit with inclination of +/-63.4 degrees and
orbital period of about twelve hours.

Satellite television, like other communications relayed by satellite, starts
with a transmitting antenna located at an uplink facility.[23] Uplink
facilities transmit the signal to the satellite over a narrow beam of
microwaves, typically in the C-band frequency range due to its resistance to
rain fade.[23] Uplink satellite dishes are very large, often as much as 9 to
12 metres (30 to 40 feet) in diameter[23] to achieve accurate aiming and
increased signal strength at the satellite, to improve reliability.[23] The
uplink dish is pointed toward a specific satellite and the uplinked signals
are transmitted within a specific frequency range, so as to be received by one
of the transponders tuned to that frequency range aboard that satellite.[23]
The transponder then converts the signals to Ku band, a process known as
"translation," and transmits them back to earth to be received by home
satellite stations.[23]

The downlinked satellite signal, weaker after traveling the great distance
(see inverse-square law), is collected by using a rooftop parabolic receiving
dish ("satellite dish"), which reflects the weak signal to the dish's focal
point.[24] Mounted on brackets at the dish's focal point is a feedhorn[24]
which passes the signals through a waveguide to a device called a low-noise
block converter (LNB) or low noise converter (LNC) attached to the horn.[24]
The LNB amplifies the weak signals, filters the block of frequencies in which
the satellite television signals are transmitted, and converts the block of
frequencies to a lower frequency range in the L-band range.[24] The signal is
then passed through a coaxial cable into the residence to the satellite
television receiver, a set-top box next to the television.

The reason for using the LNB to do the frequency translation at the dish is so
that the signal can be carried into the residence using cheap coaxial cable.
To transport the signal into the house at its original Ku band microwave
frequency would require an expensive waveguide, a metal pipe to carry the
radio waves.[25] The cable connecting the receiver to the LNB are of the low
loss type RG-6, quad shield RG-6, or RG-11.[26] RG-59 is not recommended for
this application as it is not technically designed to carry frequencies above
950 MHz, but will work in many circumstances, depending on the quality of the
coaxial wire.[26] The shift to more affordable technology from the 50 ohm
impedance cable and N-connectors of the early C-band systems to the cheaper 75
ohm technology and F-connectors allowed the early satellite television
receivers to use, what were in reality, modified UHF television tuners which
selected the satellite television channel for down conversion to another lower
intermediate frequency centered on 70 MHz where it was demodulated.[25]

An LNB can only handle a single receiver.[22] This is due to the fact that the
LNB is mapping two different circular polarisations – right hand and left hand
– and in the case of the Ku-band two different reception bands – lower and
upper – to one and the same frequency band on the cable, and is a practical
problem for home satellite reception.[22] Depending on which frequency a
transponder is transmitting at and on what polarisation it is using, the
satellite receiver has to switch the LNB into one of four different modes in
order to receive a specific desired program on a specific transponder.[22] The
receiver uses the DiSEqC protocol to control the LNB mode, which handles
this.[22] If several satellite receivers are to be attached to a single dish a
so-called multiswitch must be used in conjunction with a special type of
LNB.[22] There are also LNBs available with a multiswitch already
integrated.[22] This problem becomes more complicated when several receivers
use several dishes or several LNBs mounted in a single dish are aimed at
different satellites.[22]

The set-top box selects the channel desired by the user by filtering that
channel from the multiple channels received from the satellite, converts the
signal to a lower intermediate frequency, decrypts the encrypted signal,
demodulates the radio signal and sends the resulting video signal to the
television through a cable.[26] To decrypt the signal the receiver box must be
"activated" by the satellite company. If the customer fails to pay his monthly
bill the box is "deactivated" by a signal from the company, and the system
will not work until the company reactivates it. Some receivers are capable of
decrypting the received signal itself. These receivers are called integrated
receiver/decoders or IRDs.[26]

Analog television which was distributed via satellite was usually sent
scrambled or unscrambled in NTSC, PAL, or SECAM television broadcast
standards. The analog signal is frequency modulated and is converted from an
FM signal to what is referred to as baseband. This baseband comprises the
video signal and the audio subcarrier(s). The audio subcarrier is further
demodulated to provide a raw audio signal.

Later signals were digitized television signal or multiplex of signals,
typically QPSK. In general, digital television, including that transmitted via
satellites, is based on open standards such as MPEG and DVB-S/DVB-S2 or
ISDB-S.[ _citation needed_ ]

The conditional access encryption/scrambling methods include NDS, BISS, Conax,
Digicipher, Irdeto, Cryptoworks, DG Crypt, Beta digital, SECA Mediaguard,
Logiways, Nagravision, PowerVu, Viaccess, Videocipher, and VideoGuard. Many
conditional access systems have been compromised.

An event called sun outage occurs when the sun lines up directly behind the
satellite in the field of view of the receiving satellite dish.[27] This
happens for about a 10-minute period daily around midday, twice every year for
a two-week period in the spring and fall around the equinox. During this
period, the sun is within the main lobe of the dish's reception pattern, so
the strong microwave noise emitted by the sun on the same frequencies used by
the satellite's transponders drowns out reception.[27]

Direct-To-Home (DTHTV) can either refer to the communications satellites
themselves that deliver service or the actual television service.[28] Most
satellite television customers in developed television markets get their
programming through a direct broadcast satellite provider.[28] Signals are
transmitted using Ku band and are completely digital which means it has high
picture and stereo sound quality.[2]

Programming for satellite television channels comes from multiple sources and
may include live studio feeds.[29] The broadcast center assembles and packages
programming into channels for transmission and, where necessary, encrypts the
channels. The signal is then sent to the uplink [30] where it is transmitted
to the satellite. With some broadcast centers, the studios, administration and
up-link are all part of the same campus.[31] The satellite then translates and
broadcasts the channels.[32]

Most systems use the DVB-S standard for transmission.[28] With pay television
services, the datastream is encrypted and requires proprietary reception
equipment. While the underlying reception technology is similar, the pay
television technology is proprietary, often consisting of a conditional-access
module and smart card. This measure assures satellite television providers
that only authorized, paying subscribers have access to pay television content
but at the same time can allow free-to-air channels to be viewed even by the
people with standard equipment available in the market.

Some countries operate satellite television services which can be received for
free, without paying a subscription fee. This is called free-to-air satellite
television. Germany is likely the leader in free-to-air with approximately 250
digital channels (including 83 HDTV channels and various regional channels)
broadcast from the Astra 19.2°E satellite constellation.[33] These are not
marketed as a DBS service, but are received in approximately 18 million homes,
as well as in any home using the _Sky Deutschland_ commercial DBS system. All
German analogue satellite broadcasts ceased on 30 April 2012.[34][35]

The United Kingdom has approximately 160 digital channels (including the
regional variations of BBC channels, ITV channels, Channel 4 and Channel 5)
that are broadcast without encryption from the Astra 28.2°E satellite
constellation, and receivable on any DVB-S receiver (a DVB-S2 receiver is
required for certain high definition television services). Most of these
channels are included within the Sky EPG, and an increasing number within the
Freesat EPG.

India's national broadcaster, Doordarshan, promotes a free-to-air DBS package
as "DD Free Dish", which is provided as in-fill for the country's terrestrial
transmission network. It is broadcast from GSAT-15 at 93.5°E and contains
about 80 FTA channels.

While originally launched as backhaul for their digital terrestrial television
service, a large number of French channels are free-to-air on satellites at
5°W, and have recently been announced as being official in-fill for the DTT
network.

In North America (United States, Canada and Mexico) there are over 80 FTA
digital channels available on Galaxy 19 (with the majority being ethnic or
religious in nature). Other FTA satellites include AMC-4, AMC-6, Galaxy 18,
and Satmex 5\. A company called GloryStar promotes FTA religious broadcasters
on Galaxy 19.

The term Television receive-only, or TVRO, arose during the early days of
satellite television reception to differentiate it from commercial satellite
television uplink and downlink operations (transmit and receive). This was the
primary method of satellite television transmissions before the satellite
television industry shifted, with the launch of higher powered DBS satellites
in the early 1990s which transmitted their signals on the Ku band
frequencies.[3][36] Satellite television channels at that time were intended
to be used by cable television networks rather than received by home
viewers.[37] Early satellite television receiver systems were largely
constructed by hobbyists and engineers. These early TVRO systems operated
mainly on the C-band frequencies and the dishes required were large; typically
over 3 meters (10 ft) in diameter.[38] Consequently, TVRO is often referred to
as "big dish" or "Big Ugly Dish" (BUD) satellite television.

TVRO systems were designed to receive analog and digital satellite feeds of
both television or audio from both C-band and Ku-band transponders on FSS-type
satellites.[39][40] The higher frequency Ku-band systems tend to resemble DBS
systems and can use a smaller dish antenna because of the higher power
transmissions and greater antenna gain. TVRO systems tend to use larger rather
than smaller satellite dish antennas, since it is more likely that the owner
of a TVRO system would have a C-band-only setup rather than a Ku band-only
setup. Additional receiver boxes allow for different types of digital
satellite signal reception, such as DVB/MPEG-2 and 4DTV.

The narrow beam width of a normal parabolic satellite antenna means it can
only receive signals from a single satellite at a time.[41] Simulsat or the
Vertex-RSI TORUS, is a quasi-parabolic satellite earthstation antenna that is
capable of receiving satellite transmissions from 35 or more C- and Ku-band
satellites simultaneously.[42]

In 1945 British science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke proposed a worldwide
communications system which would function by means of three satellites
equally spaced apart in earth orbit.[43][44] This was published in the October
1945 issue of the Wireless World magazine and won him the Franklin Institute's
Stuart Ballantine Medal in 1963.[45][46]

The first public satellite television signals from Europe to North America
were relayed via the Telstar satellite over the Atlantic ocean on 23 July
1962, although a test broadcast had taken place almost two weeks earlier on 11
July.[47] The signals were received and broadcast in North American and
European countries and watched by over 100 million.[47] Launched in 1962, the
_Relay 1_ satellite was the first satellite to transmit television signals
from the US to Japan.[48] The first geosynchronous communication satellite,
Syncom 2, was launched on 26 July 1963.[49]

The world's first commercial communications satellite, called Intelsat I and
nicknamed "Early Bird", was launched into geosynchronous orbit on April 6,
1965.[50] The first national network of television satellites, called Orbita,
was created by the Soviet Union in October 1967, and was based on the
principle of using the highly elliptical Molniya satellite for rebroadcasting
and delivering of television signals to ground downlink stations.[51] The
first commercial North American satellite to carry television transmissions
was Canada's geostationary Anik 1, which was launched on 9 November 1972.[52]
ATS-6, the world's first experimental educational and direct broadcast
satellite (DBS), was launched on 30 May 1974.[53] It transmitted at 860 MHz
using wideband FM modulation and had two sound channels. The transmissions
were focused on the Indian subcontinent but experimenters were able to receive
the signal in Western Europe using home constructed equipment that drew on UHF
television design techniques already in use.[54]

The first in a series of Soviet geostationary satellites to carry direct-to-
home television, Ekran 1, was launched on 26 October 1976.[55] It used a 714
MHz UHF downlink frequency so that the transmissions could be received with
existing UHF television technology rather than microwave technology.[56]

The satellite television industry developed first in the US from the cable
television industry as communication satellites were being used to distribute
television programming to remote cable television headends. Home Box Office
(HBO), Turner Broadcasting System (TBS), and Christian Broadcasting Network
(CBN, later The Family Channel) were among the first to use satellite
television to deliver programming. Taylor Howard of San Andreas, California
became the first person to receive C-band satellite signals with his home-
built system in 1976.[57]

In the US, PBS, a non-profit public broadcasting service, began to distribute
its television programming by satellite in 1978.[58]

In 1979, Soviet engineers developed the Moskva (or Moscow) system of
broadcasting and delivering of TV signals via satellites. They launched the
Gorizont communication satellites later that same year. These satellites used
geostationary orbits.[59] They were equipped with powerful on-board
transponders, so the size of receiving parabolic antennas of downlink stations
was reduced to 4 and 2.5 metres.[59] On October 18, 1979, the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) began allowing people to have home satellite
earth stations without a federal government license.[60] The front cover of
the 1979 Neiman-Marcus Christmas catalogue featured the first home satellite
TV stations on sale for $36,500.[61] The dishes were nearly 20 feet (6.1 m) in
diameter[62] and were remote controlled.[63] The price went down by half soon
after that, but there were only eight more channels.[64] The Society for
Private and Commercial Earth Stations (SPACE), an organisation which
represented consumers and satellite TV system owners, was established in
1980.[65]

Early satellite television systems were not very popular due to their expense
and large dish size.[66] The satellite television dishes of the systems in the
late 1970s and early 1980s were 10 to 16 feet (3.0 to 4.9 m) in diameter,[67]
made of fibreglass or solid aluminum or steel,[68] and in the United States
cost more than $5,000, sometimes as much as $10,000.[69] Programming sent from
ground stations was relayed from eighteen satellites in geostationary orbit
located 22,300 miles (35,900 km) above the Earth.[70][71]

By 1980, satellite television was well established in the USA and Europe. On
26 April 1982, the first satellite channel in the UK, Satellite Television
Ltd. (later Sky One), was launched.[72] Its signals were transmitted from the
ESA's Orbital Test Satellites.[72] Between 1981 and 1985, TVRO systems' sales
rates increased as prices fell. Advances in receiver technology and the use of
gallium arsenide FET technology enabled the use of smaller dishes. Five
hundred thousand systems, some costing as little as $2000, were sold in the US
in 1984.[69][73] Dishes pointing to one satellite were even cheaper.[74]
People in areas without local broadcast stations or cable television service
could obtain good-quality reception with no monthly fees.[69][71] The large
dishes were a subject of much consternation, as many people considered them
eyesores, and in the US most condominiums, neighborhoods, and other homeowner
associations tightly restricted their use, except in areas where such
restrictions were illegal.[3] These restrictions were altered in 1986 when the
Federal Communications Commission ruled all of them illegal.[66] A
municipality could require a property owner to relocate the dish if it
violated other zoning restrictions, such as a setback requirement, but could
not outlaw their use.[66] The necessity of these restrictions would slowly
decline as the dishes got smaller.[66]

Originally, all channels were broadcast in the clear (ITC) because the
equipment necessary to receive the programming was too expensive for
consumers. With the growing number of TVRO systems, the program providers and
broadcasters had to scramble their signal and develop subscription systems.

In October 1984, the U.S. Congress passed the Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, which gave those using TVRO systems the right to receive signals for
free unless they were scrambled, and required those who did scramble to make
their signals available for a reasonable fee.[71][75] Since cable channels
could prevent reception by big dishes, other companies had an incentive to
offer competition.[76] In January 1986, HBO began using the now-obsolete
VideoCipher II system to encrypt their channels.[67] Other channels used less
secure television encryption systems. The scrambling of HBO was met with much
protest from owners of big-dish systems, most of which had no other option at
the time for receiving such channels, claiming that clear signals from cable
channels would be difficult to receive.[77] Eventually HBO allowed dish owners
to subscribe directly to their service for $12.95 per month, a price equal to
or higher than what cable subscribers were paying, and required a descrambler
to be purchased for $395.[77] This led to the attack on HBO's transponder
Galaxy 1 by John R. MacDougall in April 1986.[77] One by one, all commercial
channels followed HBO's lead and began scrambling their channels.[78] The
Satellite Broadcasting and Communications Association (SBCA) was founded on
December 2, 1986 as the result of a merger between SPACE and the Direct
Broadcast Satellite Association (DBSA).[73]

Videocipher II used analog scrambling on its video signal and Data Encryption
Standard–based encryption on its audio signal. VideoCipher II was defeated,
and there was a black market for descrambler devices which were initially sold
as "test" devices.[78]

The necessity for better satellite television programming than TVRO arose in
the 1980s. Satellite television services, first in Europe, began transmitting
Ku band signals in the late 1980s. On 11 December 1988 Luxembourg launched
Astra 1A, the first satellite to provide medium power satellite coverage to
Western Europe.[79] This was one of the first medium-powered satellites,
transmitting signals in Ku band and allowing reception with small(90 cm)
dishes for the first time ever.[79] The launch of Astra beat the winner of the
UK's state Direct Broadcast Satellite licence, British Satellite Broadcasting,
to the market, and accelerated its demise.[79]

By 1987, nine channels were scrambled, but 99 others were available free-to-
air.[75] While HBO initially charged a monthly fee of $19.95, soon it became
possible to unscramble all channels for $200 a year.[75] Dish sales went down
from 600,000 in 1985 to 350,000 in 1986, but pay television services were
seeing dishes as something positive since some people would never have cable
service, and the industry was starting to recover as a result.[75] Scrambling
also led to the development of pay-per-view events.[75] On November 1, 1988,
NBC began scrambling its C-band signal but left its Ku band signal unencrypted
in order for affiliates to not lose viewers who could not see their
advertising.[80] Most of the two million satellite dish users in the United
States still used C-band.[80] ABC and CBS were considering scrambling, though
CBS was reluctant due to the number of people unable to receive local network
affiliates.[80] The piracy on satellite television networks in the US led to
the introduction of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992. This legislation enabled anyone caught engaging in signal theft
to be fined up to $50,000 and to be sentenced to a maximum of two years in
prison.[81] A repeat offender can be fined up to $100,000 and be imprisoned
for up to five years.[81]

Satellite television had also developed in Europe but it initially used low
power communication satellites and it required dish sizes of over 1.7 metres.
On 11 December 1988 Luxembourg launched Astra 1A, the first satellite to
provide medium power satellite coverage to Western Europe.[82] This was one of
the first medium-powered satellites, transmitting signals in Ku band and
allowing reception with small dishes (90 cm).[82] The launch of Astra beat the
winner of the UK's state Direct Broadcast Satellite licence holder, British
Satellite Broadcasting, to the market.

In the US in the early 1990s, four large cable companies launched PrimeStar, a
direct broadcasting company using medium power satellites. The relatively
strong transmissions allowed the use of smaller (90 cm) dishes. Its popularity
declined with the 1994 launch of the Hughes DirecTV and Dish Network satellite
television systems.

On March 4, 1996 EchoStar introduced Digital Sky Highway (Dish Network) using
the EchoStar 1 satellite.[83] EchoStar launched a second satellite in
September 1996 to increase the number of channels available on Dish Network to
170.[83] These systems provided better pictures and stereo sound on 150–200
video and audio channels, and allowed small dishes to be used. This greatly
reduced the popularity of TVRO systems. In the mid-1990s, channels began
moving their broadcasts to digital television transmission using the
DigiCipher conditional access system.[84]

In addition to encryption, the widespread availability, in the US, of DBS
services such as PrimeStar and DirecTV had been reducing the popularity of
TVRO systems since the early 1990s. Signals from DBS satellites (operating in
the more recent Ku band) are higher in both frequency and power (due to
improvements in the solar panels and energy efficiency of modern satellites)
and therefore require much smaller dishes than C-band, and the digital
modulation methods now used require less signal strength at the receiver than
analog modulation methods.[85] Each satellite also can carry up to 32
transponders in the Ku band, but only 24 in the C band, and several digital
subchannels can be multiplexed (MCPC) or carried separately (SCPC) on a single
transponder.[86] Advances in noise reduction due to improved microwave
technology and semiconductor materials have also had an effect.[86] However,
one consequence of the higher frequencies used for DBS services is rain fade
where viewers lose signal during a heavy downpour. C-band satellite television
signals are less prone to rain fade.[87]

In a return to the older (but proven) technologies of satellite communication,
the current DBS-based satellite providers in the USA (Dish Network and
DirecTV) are now utilizing additional capacity on the Ku-band transponders of
existing FSS-class satellites, in addition to the capacity on their own
existing fleets of DBS satellites in orbit. This was done in order to provide
more channel capacity for their systems, as required by the increasing number
of High-Definition and simulcast local station channels. The reception of the
channels carried on the Ku-band FSS satellite's respective transponders has
been achieved by both DirecTV & Dish Network issuing to their subscribers
dishes twice as big in diameter (36") than the previous 18" (& 20" for the
Dish Network "Dish500") dishes the services used initially, equipped with 2
circular-polarized LNBFs (for reception of 2 native DBS satellites of the
provider, 1 per LNBF), and 1 standard linear-polarized LNB for reception of
channels from an FSS-type satellite. These newer DBS/FSS-hybrid dishes,
marketed by DirecTV and Dish Network as the "SlimLine" and "SuperDish" models
respectively, are now the current standard for both providers, with their
original 18"/20" single or dual LNBF dishes either now obsolete, or only used
for program packages, separate channels, or services only broadcast over the
providers' DBS satellites.

On 29 November 1999 US President Bill Clinton signed the Satellite Home Viewer
Improvement Act (SHVIA).[88] The act allowed Americans to receive local
broadcast signals via direct broadcast satellite systems for the first
time.[88]

Satellite Television for the Asian Region (STAR), a service based in Mumbai
and Hong Kong which now provides satellite TV coverage to Asia and Australia,
introduced satellite TV to the Asian region in the early 1990s. It began
broadcasting signals using the AsiaSat 1 satellite on 1 January 1991.[
_citation needed_ ]

1More than 400,000 television service subscribers.

