The **Secretary of State of Florida** is a constitutional officer of the state
government of the U.S. state of Florida, established by the original 1838
state constitution.[1]

Like the corresponding officials in other states, the original charge of the
Secretary of State — to be the "Keeper of the Great Seal" — has expanded
greatly since the office was first created. According to the state website,
"Today, the Secretary of State is Florida's Chief of Elections, Chief Cultural
Officer, the State Protocol Officer and the head of the Department of
State."[1]

The current secretary is Laurel M. Lee.[2]

During the territorial period of Florida, the Secretary of the Territory was
one of two major appointed positions within the executive department of the
territory. Like the governor, the secretary was originally appointed by the
president of the United States and confirmed by Congress. The job of the
secretary was similar to that of a modern-day Lieutenant Governor, assuming
administrative responsibilities of the territory in the absence of the
governor. For example, the first Secretary of the Territory George Walton
served as Acting Governor of the Territory until William P. Duval assumed
office later that year. Walton was the first civilian to act in this capacity
following the American acquisition of Florida.

The modern-day Department of State and the position of Secretary of State
dates to 1845, when Florida achieved statehood. Originally, the Secretary of
State of Florida was elected by the people of the state in a general election.
However, in 1998,[3] constitutional changes removed the Secretary of State
from the elected Cabinet of the executive branch.[4] That year, Katherine
Harris won the last election for Secretary of State.[5]

Since 2002, the Secretary of State of Florida has been appointed by the
Governor.[6]

_italics_ indicate no secretary of state in this state, closest equivalent
listed

