**Self-organization** , also called (in the social sciences) spontaneous
order, is a process where some form of overall order arises from local
interactions between parts of an initially disordered system. The process can
be spontaneous when sufficient energy is available, not needing control by any
external agent. It is often triggered by random fluctuations, amplified by
positive feedback. The resulting organization is wholly decentralized,
distributed over all the components of the system. As such, the organization
is typically robust and able to survive or self-repair substantial
perturbation. Chaos theory discusses self-organization in terms of islands of
predictability in a sea of chaotic unpredictability.

Self-organization occurs in many physical, chemical, biological, robotic, and
cognitive systems. Examples of self-organization include crystallization,
thermal convection of fluids, chemical oscillation, animal swarming, neural
circuits, and artificial neural networks.

Self-organization is realized[2] in the physics of non-equilibrium processes,
and in chemical reactions, where it is often described as self-assembly. The
concept has proven useful in biology,[3] from molecular to ecosystem level.[4]
Cited examples of self-organizing behaviour also appear in the literature of
many other disciplines, both in the natural sciences and in the social
sciences such as economics or anthropology. Self-organization has also been
observed in mathematical systems such as cellular automata.[5] Self-
organization is an example of the related concept of emergence.[6]

Self-organization relies on four basic ingredients:[7]

The cybernetician William Ross Ashby formulated the original principle of
self-organization in 1947.[8][9] It states that any deterministic dynamic
system automatically evolves towards a state of equilibrium that can be
described in terms of an attractor in a basin of surrounding states. Once
there, the further evolution of the system is constrained to remain in the
attractor. This constraint implies a form of mutual dependency or coordination
between its constituent components or subsystems. In Ashby's terms, each
subsystem has adapted to the environment formed by all other subsystems.[8]

The cybernetician Heinz von Foerster formulated the principle of "order from
noise" in 1960.[10] It notes that self-organization is facilitated by random
perturbations ("noise") that let the system explore a variety of states in its
state space. This increases the chance that the system will arrive into the
basin of a "strong" or "deep" attractor, from which it then quickly enters the
attractor itself. The biophysicist Henri Atlan developed this concept by
proposing the principle of "complexity from noise"[11][12] (French: _le
principe de complexité par le bruit_ )[13] first in the 1972 book
_L'organisation biologique et la théorie de l'information_[14] and then in the
1979 book _Entre le cristal et la fumée_.[15] The thermodynamicist Ilya
Prigogine formulated a similar principle as "order through fluctuations"[16]
or "order out of chaos".[17] It is applied in the method of simulated
annealing for problem solving and machine learning.[18]

The idea that the dynamics of a system can lead to an increase in its
organization has a long history. The ancient atomists such as Democritus and
Lucretius believed that a designing intelligence is unnecessary to create
order in nature, arguing that given enough time and space and matter, order
emerges by itself.[19]

The philosopher René Descartes presents self-organization hypothetically in
the fifth part of his 1637 _Discourse on Method_. He elaborated on the idea in
his unpublished work _The World_.[a]

Immanuel Kant used the term "self-organizing" in his 1790 _Critique of
Judgment_ , where he argued that teleology is a meaningful concept only if
there exists such an entity whose parts or "organs" are simultaneously ends
and means. Such a system of organs must be able to behave as if it has a mind
of its own, that is, it is capable of governing itself.[20]

In such a natural product as this every part is thought as _owing_ its
presence to the agency of all the remaining parts, and also as existing _for
the sake of the others_ and of the whole, that is as an instrument, or
organ... The part must be an organ _producing_ the other parts—each,
consequently, reciprocally producing the others... Only under these conditions
and upon these terms can such a product be an _organized_ and _self-organized_
being, and, as such, be called a _physical end_.[20]

Sadi Carnot (1796–1832) and Rudolf Clausius (1822–1888) discovered the second
law of thermodynamics in the 19th century. It states that total entropy,
sometimes understood as disorder, will always increase over time in an
isolated system. This means that a system cannot spontaneously increase its
order without an external relationship that decreases order elsewhere in the
system (e.g. through consuming the low-entropy energy of a battery and
diffusing high-entropy heat).[21][22]

18th-century thinkers had sought to understand the "universal laws of form" to
explain the observed forms of living organisms. This idea became associated
with Lamarckism and fell into disrepute until the early 20th century, when
D'Arcy Wentworth Thompson (1860–1948) attempted to revive it.[23]

The psychiatrist and engineer W. Ross Ashby introduced the term "self-
organizing" to contemporary science in 1947.[8] It was taken up by the
cyberneticians Heinz von Foerster, Gordon Pask, Stafford Beer; and von
Foerster organized a conference on "The Principles of Self-Organization" at
the University of Illinois' Allerton Park in June, 1960 which led to a series
of conferences on Self-Organizing Systems.[24] Norbert Wiener took up the idea
in the second edition of his _Cybernetics: or Control and Communication in the
Animal and the Machine_ (1961).

Self-organization was associated[ _by whom?_ ] with general systems theory in
the 1960s, but did not become commonplace in the scientific literature until
physicists Hermann Haken et al. and complex systems researchers adopted it in
a greater picture from cosmology Erich Jantsch,[ _clarification needed_ ]
chemistry with dissipative system, biology and sociology as autopoiesis to
system thinking in the following 1980s (Santa Fe Institute) and 1990s (complex
adaptive system), until our days with the disruptive emerging technologies
profounded by a rhizomatic network theory.[25]

Around 2008-2009, a concept of guided self-organization started to take shape.
This approach aims to regulate self-organization for specific purposes, so
that a dynamical system may reach specific attractors or outcomes. The
regulation constrains a self-organizing process within a complex system by
restricting local interactions between the system components, rather than
following an explicit control mechanism or a global design blueprint. The
desired outcomes, such as increases in the resultant internal structure and/or
functionality, are achieved by combining task-independent global objectives
with task-dependent constraints on local interactions[26][27].

The many self-organizing phenomena in physics include phase transitions and
spontaneous symmetry breaking such as spontaneous magnetization and crystal
growth in classical physics, and the laser,[28] superconductivity and
Bose–Einstein condensation in quantum physics. It is found in self-organized
criticality in dynamical systems, in tribology, in spin foam systems, and in
loop quantum gravity,[29] river basins and deltas, in dendritic solidification
(snow flakes), and in turbulent structure.[4][5]

Self-organization in chemistry includes molecular self-assembly,[31] reaction-
diffusion systems and oscillating reactions,[32] autocatalytic networks,
liquid crystals,[33] grid complexes, colloidal crystals, self-assembled
monolayers,[34][35] micelles, microphase separation of block copolymers, and
Langmuir-Blodgett films.[36]

Self-organization in biology[3][37] can be observed in spontaneous folding of
proteins and other biomacromolecules, formation of lipid bilayer membranes,
pattern formation and morphogenesis in developmental biology, the coordination
of human movement, social behaviour in insects (bees, ants, termites),[38] and
mammals, flocking behaviour in birds and fish.[39]

The mathematical biologist Stuart Kauffman and other structuralists have
suggested that self-organization may play roles alongside natural selection in
three areas of evolutionary biology, namely population dynamics, molecular
evolution, and morphogenesis. However, this does not take into account the
essential role of energy in driving biochemical reactions in cells. The
systems of reactions in any cell are self-catalyzing but not simply self-
organizing as they are thermodynamically open systems relying on a continuous
input of energy.[40][41] Self-organization is not an alternative to natural
selection, but it constrains what evolution can do and provides mechanisms
such as the self-assembly of membranes which evolution then exploits.[42]

Phenomena from mathematics and computer science such as cellular automata,
random graphs, and some instances of evolutionary computation and artificial
life exhibit features of self-organization. In swarm robotics, self-
organization is used to produce emergent behavior. In particular the theory of
random graphs has been used as a justification for self-organization as a
general principle of complex systems. In the field of multi-agent systems,
understanding how to engineer systems that are capable of presenting self-
organized behavior is an active research area.[43] Optimization algorithms can
be considered self-organizing because they aim to find the optimal solution to
a problem. If the solution is considered as a state of the iterative system,
the optimal solution is the selected, converged structure of the
system.[44][45] Self-organizing networks include small-world networks[46] and
scale-free networks. These emerge from bottom-up interactions, unlike top-down
hierarchical networks within organizations, which are not self-organizing.[47]
Cloud computing systems have been argued to be inherently self-organising,[48]
but while they have some autonomy, they are not self-managing as they do not
have the goal of reducing their own complexity.[49][50]

Norbert Wiener regarded the automatic serial identification of a black box and
its subsequent reproduction as self-organization in cybernetics.[51] The
importance of phase locking or the "attraction of frequencies", as he called
it, is discussed in the 2nd edition of his _Cybernetics: Or Control and
Communication in the Animal and the Machine_.[52] K. Eric Drexler sees self-
replication as a key step in nano and universal assembly. By contrast, the
four concurrently connected galvanometers of W. Ross Ashby's Homeostat hunt,
when perturbed, to converge on one of many possible stable states.[53] Ashby
used his state counting measure of variety[54] to describe stable states and
produced the "Good Regulator"[55] theorem which requires internal models for
self-organized endurance and stability (e.g. Nyquist stability criterion).
Warren McCulloch proposed "Redundancy of Potential Command"[56] as
characteristic of the organization of the brain and human nervous system and
the necessary condition for self-organization. Heinz von Foerster proposed
Redundancy, _R_ =1 − _H_ / _H_ max, where _H_ is entropy.[57][58] In essence
this states that unused potential communication bandwidth is a measure of
self-organization.

In the 1970s Stafford Beer considered self-organization necessary for autonomy
in persisting and living systems. He applied his viable system model to
management. It consists of five parts: the monitoring of performance of the
survival processes (1), their management by recursive application of
regulation (2), homeostatic operational control (3) and development (4) which
produce maintenance of identity (5) under environmental perturbation. Focus is
prioritized by an alerting "algedonic loop" feedback: a sensitivity to both
pain and pleasure produced from under-performance or over-performance relative
to a standard capability.[59]

In the 1990s Gordon Pask argued that von Foerster's H and Hmax were not
independent, but interacted via countably infinite recursive concurrent spin
processes[60] which he called concepts. His strict definition of concept "a
procedure to bring about a relation"[61] permitted his theorem "Like concepts
repel, unlike concepts attract"[62] to state a general spin-based principle of
self-organization. His edict, an exclusion principle, "There are No
Doppelgangers" means no two concepts can be the same. After sufficient time,
all concepts attract and coalesce as pink noise. The theory applies to all
organizationally closed or homeostatic processes that produce enduring and
coherent products which evolve, learn and adapt.[63][60]

The self-organizing behaviour of social animals and the self-organization of
simple mathematical structures both suggest that self-organization should be
expected in human society. Tell-tale signs of self-organization are usually
statistical properties shared with self-organizing physical systems. Examples
such as critical mass, herd behaviour, groupthink and others, abound in
sociology, economics, behavioral finance and anthropology.[64]

In social theory, the concept of self-referentiality has been introduced as a
sociological application of self-organization theory by Niklas Luhmann (1984).
For Luhmann the elements of a social system are self-producing communications,
i.e. a communication produces further communications and hence a social system
can reproduce itself as long as there is dynamic communication. For Luhmann
human beings are sensors in the environment of the system. Luhmann developed
an evolutionary theory of Society and its subsystems, using functional
_analyses_ and systems _theory_.[65]

In economics, a market economy is sometimes said to be self-organizing. Paul
Krugman has written on the role that market self-organization plays in the
business cycle in his book "The Self Organizing Economy".[66] Friedrich Hayek
coined the term _catallaxy_[67] to describe a "self-organizing system of
voluntary co-operation", in regards to the spontaneous order of the free
market economy. Neo-classical economists hold that imposing central planning
usually makes the self-organized economic system less efficient. On the other
end of the spectrum, economists consider that market failures are so
significant that self-organization produces bad results and that the state
should direct production and pricing. Most economists adopt an intermediate
position and recommend a mixture of market economy and command economy
characteristics (sometimes called a mixed economy). When applied to economics,
the concept of self-organization can quickly become ideologically
imbued.[68][69]

Enabling others to "learn how to learn"[70] is often taken to mean instructing
them[71] how to submit to being taught. Self-organised learning
(S.O.L.)[72][73][74] denies that "the expert knows best" or that there is ever
"the one best method",[75][76][77] insisting instead on "the construction of
personally significant, relevant and viable meaning"[78] to be tested
experientially by the learner.[79] This may be collaborative, and more
rewarding personally.[80][81] It is seen as a lifelong process, not limited to
specific learning environments (home, school, university) or under the control
of authorities such as parents and professors.[82] It needs to be tested, and
intermittently revised, through the personal experience of the learner.[83] It
need not be restricted by either consciousness or language.[84] Fritjof Capra
argued that it is poorly recognised within psychology and education.[85] It
may be related to cybernetics as it involves a negative feedback control
loop,[61] or to systems theory.[86] It can be conducted as a learning
conversation or dialogue between learners or within one person.[87][88]

The self-organizing behavior of drivers in traffic flow determines almost all
the spatiotemporal behavior of traffic, such as traffic breakdown at a highway
bottleneck, highway capacity, and the emergence of moving traffic jams. In
1996–2002 these complex self-organizing effects were explained by Boris
Kerner's three-phase traffic theory.[89]

Order appears spontaneously in the evolution of language as individual and
population behaviour interacts with biological evolution.[90]

**Self-organized funding allocation** ( **SOFA** ) is a method of distributing
funding for scientific research. In this system, each researcher is allocated
an equal amount of funding, and is required to anonymously allocate a fraction
of their funds to the research of others. Proponents of SOFA argue that it
would result in similar distribution of funding as the present grant system,
but with less overhead.[91] In 2016, a test pilot of SOFA began in the
Netherlands.[92]

Heinz Pagels, in a 1985 review of Ilya Prigogine and Isabelle Stengers's book
_Order Out of Chaos_ in _Physics Today_ , appeals to authority:[93]

Most scientists would agree with the critical view expressed in _Problems of
Biological Physics_ (Springer Verlag, 1981) by the biophysicist L. A.
Blumenfeld, when he wrote: "The meaningful macroscopic ordering of biological
structure does not arise due to the increase of certain parameters or a system
above their critical values. These structures are built according to program-
like complicated architectural structures, the meaningful information created
during many billions of years of chemical and biological evolution being
used." Life is a consequence of microscopic, not macroscopic, organization.

Of course, Blumenfeld does not answer the further question of how those
program-like structures emerge in the first place. His explanation leads
directly to infinite regress.

In short, they [Prigogine and Stengers] maintain that time irreversibility is
not derived from a time-independent microworld, but is itself fundamental. The
virtue of their idea is that it resolves what they perceive as a "clash of
doctrines" about the nature of time in physics. Most physicists would agree
that there is neither empirical evidence to support their view, nor is there a
mathematical necessity for it. There is no "clash of doctrines." Only
Prigogine and a few colleagues hold to these speculations which, in spite of
their efforts, continue to live in the twilight zone of scientific
credibility.

In theology, Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274) in his _Summa Theologica_ assumes a
teleological created universe in rejecting the idea that something can be a
self-sufficient cause of its own organization:[94]

Since nature works for a determinate end under the direction of a higher
agent, whatever is done by nature must needs be traced back to God, as to its
first cause. So also whatever is done voluntarily must also be traced back to
some higher cause other than human reason or will, since these can change or
fail; for all things that are changeable and capable of defect must be traced
back to an immovable and self-necessary first principle, as was shown in the
body of the Article.

