**Sexual slavery** and **sexual exploitation** is attaching the right of
ownership over one or more persons with the intent of coercing or otherwise
forcing them to engage in sexual activities.[1][2] This includes forced labor,
reducing a person to a servile status (including forced marriage) and sex
trafficking persons, such as the sexual trafficking of children.[1]

Sexual slavery may also involve single-owner sexual slavery; ritual slavery,
sometimes associated with certain religious practices, such as ritual
servitude in Ghana, Togo and Benin; slavery for primarily non-sexual purposes
but where non-consensual sexual activity is common; or forced prostitution.
Concubinage was a traditional form of sexual slavery in many cultures, in
which women spent their lives in sexual servitude. In some cultures,
concubines and their children had distinct rights and legitimate social
positions.

The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action calls for an international
effort to make people aware of sexual slavery, sexual slavery is an abuse of
human rights. The incidence of sexual slavery by country has been studied and
tabulated by UNESCO, with the cooperation of various international
agencies.[3]

The Rome Statute (1998) (which defines the crimes over which the International
Criminal Court may have jurisdiction) encompasses crimes against humanity
(Article 7) which include "enslavement" (Article 7.1.c) and "sexual
enslavement" (Article 7.1.g) "when committed as part of a widespread or
systematic attack directed against any civilian population". It also defines
sexual enslavement as a war crime and a breach of the Geneva Conventions when
committed during an international armed conflict (Article 8.b.xxii) and
indirectly in an internal armed conflict under Article(8.c.ii), but the courts
jurisdiction over war crimes is explicitly excluded from including crimes
committed during "situations of internal disturbances and tensions, such as
riots, isolated and sporadic acts of violence or other acts of a similar
nature" (Article 8.d).[4]

The text of the Rome Statute does not explicitly define sexual enslavement,
but does define enslavement as "the exercise of any or all of the powers
attaching to the right of ownership over a person and includes the exercise of
such power in the course of trafficking in persons, in particular women and
children" (Article 7.2.c).[4][5]

In the commentary on the Rome Statute,[6] Mark Klamberg states:[7][8]

Sexual slavery is a particular form of enslavement which includes limitations
on one's autonomy, freedom of movement and power to decide matters relating to
one's sexual activity. Thus, the crime also includes forced marriages,
domestic servitude or other forced labor that ultimately involves forced
sexual activity. In contrast to the crime of rape, which is a completed
offence, sexual slavery constitutes a continuing offence. ... Forms of sexual
slavery can, for example, be practices such as the detention of women in "rape
camps" or "comfort stations", forced temporary "marriages" to soldiers and
other practices involving the treatment of women as chattel, and as such,
violations of the peremptory norm prohibiting slavery.

Commercial sexual exploitation of adults (often referred to as "sex
trafficking")[9] is a type of human trafficking involving the recruitment,
transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of people, by coercive or
abusive means for the purpose of sexual exploitation. Commercial sexual
exploitation is not the only form of human trafficking and estimates vary as
to the percentage of human trafficking which is for the purpose of
transporting someone into sexual slavery.

The BBC News cited a report by UNODC as listing the most common destinations
for victims of human trafficking in 2007 as Thailand, Japan, Israel, Belgium,
the Netherlands, Germany, Italy, Turkey and the US. The report lists Thailand,
China, Nigeria, Albania, Bulgaria, Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine as major
sources of trafficked persons.[10]

Commercial sexual exploitation of children (CSEC) includes child prostitution
(or child sex trafficking), child sex tourism, child pornography, or other
forms of transactional sex with children. The Youth Advocate Program
International (YAPI) describes CSEC as a form of coercion and violence against
children and a contemporary form of slavery.[11][12]

A declaration of the World Congress Against the Commercial Sexual Exploitation
of Children, held in Stockholm in 1996, defined CSEC as, "sexual abuse by the
adult and remuneration in cash or in kind to the child or to a third person or
persons. The child is treated as a sexual object and as a commercial
object".[12]

Child prostitution, or child sex trafficking, is a form of sexual slavery.[13]
It is the commercial sexual exploitation of children, in which a child
performs the services of prostitution, usually for the financial benefit of an
adult.

India's federal police said in 2009 that they believed around 1.2 million
children in India to be involved in prostitution.[14] A CBI statement said
that studies and surveys sponsored by the Ministry of Women and Child
Development estimated about 40% of India's prostitutes to be children.[14]

Thailand’s Health System Research Institute reported that children in
prostitution make up 40% of prostitutes in Thailand.[15]

In some parts of the world, child prostitution is tolerated or ignored by the
authorities. Reflecting an attitude which prevails in many developing
countries, a judge from Honduras said, on condition of anonymity: "If the
victim [the child prostitute] is older than 12, if he or she refuses to file a
complaint and if the parents clearly profit from their child's commerce, we
tend to look the other way".[16]

Child sex tourism is a form child sex trafficking, and is mainly centered on
buying and selling children into sexual slavery.[17][18] It is when an adult
travels to a foreign country for the purpose of engaging in commercially
facilitated child sexual abuse.[19] Child sex tourism results in both mental
and physical consequences for the exploited children, that may include
"disease (including HIV/AIDS), drug addiction, pregnancy, malnutrition, social
ostracism, and possibly death", according to the State Department of the
United States.[19] Thailand, Cambodia, India, Brazil and Mexico have been
identified as leading hotspots of child sexual exploitation.[20]

Child pornography, sometimes referred to as 'child abuse images',[21][22][23]
refers to images or films depicting sexually explicit activities involving a
child. As such, child pornography is often a visual record of child sexual
abuse.[24][25][26] Abuse of the child occurs during the sexual acts which are
photographed in the production of child pornography,[24][25][27][28] and the
effects of the abuse on the child (and continuing into maturity) are
compounded by the wide distribution and lasting availability of the
photographs of the abuse.[29][30][31]

Child sex trafficking often involves child pornography.[17] Children are
commonly purchased and sold for sexual purposes without the parents knowing.
In these cases, children are often used to produce child pornography,
especially sadistic forms of child pornography where they may be tortured.[17]

Most, if not all, forms of forced prostitution may be viewed as a kind of
sexual slavery.[32] The terms "forced prostitution" and "enforced
prostitution" appear in international and humanitarian conventions but have
been insufficiently understood and inconsistently applied. "Forced
prostitution" generally refers to conditions of control over a person who is
coerced by another to engage in sexual activity.[33]

The issue of consent in prostitution is hotly debated. Opinion in places such
as Europe has been divided over the question of whether prostitution should be
considered as a free choice or as inherently exploitative of women.[34] The
law in Sweden, Norway and Iceland – where it is illegal to pay for sex, but
not to sell sexual services – is based on the notion that all forms of
prostitution are inherently exploitative, opposing the notion that
prostitution can be voluntary.[35] In contrast, prostitution is a recognized
profession in countries such as the Netherlands and Germany.

In 1949 the UN General Assembly adopted the Convention for the Suppression of
the Traffic in Persons and of the Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others
(the 1949 Convention). The 1949 Convention supersedes a number of earlier
conventions that covered some aspects of forced prostitution. Signatories are
charged with three obligations under the 1949 Convention: prohibition of
trafficking, specific administrative and enforcement measures, and social
measures aimed at trafficked persons. The 1949 Convention presents two shifts
in perspective of the trafficking problem in that it views prostitutes as
victims of the procurers, and in that it eschews the terms "white slave
traffic" and "women," using for the first time race- and gender-neutral
language.[36] Article 1 of the 1949 Convention provides punishment for any
person who "[p]rocures, entices or leads away, for purposes of prostitution,
another person" or "[e]xploits the prostitution of another person, even with
the consent of that person." To fall under the provisions of the 1949
Convention, the trafficking need not cross international lines.[36]

A forced marriage is a marriage where one or both participants are married,
without their freely given consent.[37] Forced marriage is a form of sexual
slavery.[7][8] Causes for forced marriages include customs such as bride price
and dowry; poverty; the importance given to female premarital virginity;
"family honor"; the fact that marriage is considered in certain communities a
social arrangement between the extended families of the bride and groom;
limited education and economic options; perceived protection of cultural or
religious traditions; assisting immigration.[38][39][40][41][42] Forced
marriage is most common in parts of South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa.[43]

The Rome Statute Explanatory Memorandum, which defines the jurisdiction of the
International Criminal Court, recognizes rape, sexual slavery, forced
prostitution, forced pregnancy, forced sterilization, "or any other form of
sexual violence of comparable gravity" as crime against humanity if the action
is part of a widespread or systematic practice.[44][45] Sexual slavery was
first recognized as a crime against humanity when the International Criminal
Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia issued arrest warrants based on the Geneva
Conventions and Violations of the Laws or Customs of War. Specifically, it was
recognised that Muslim women in Foča (southeastern Bosnia and Herzegovina)
were subjected to systematic and widespread gang rape, torture and sexual
enslavement by Bosnian Serb soldiers, policemen, and members of paramilitary
groups after the takeover of the city in April 1992.[46] The indictment was of
major legal significance and was the first time that sexual assaults were
investigated for the purpose of prosecution under the rubric of torture and
enslavement as a crime against humanity.[46] The indictment was confirmed by a
2001 verdict by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia
that rape and sexual enslavement are crimes against humanity. This ruling
challenged the widespread acceptance of rape and sexual enslavement of women
as an intrinsic part of war.[47] The International Criminal Tribunal for the
former Yugoslavia found three Bosnian Serb men guilty of rape of Bosniak
(Bosnian Muslim) women and girls – some as young as 12 and 15 years of age –
in Foča, eastern Bosnia and Herzegovina. The charges were brought as crimes
against humanity and war crimes. Furthermore, two of the men were found guilty
of the crime against humanity of sexual enslavement for holding women and
girls captive in a number of de facto detention centers. Many of the women had
subsequently disappeared.[47]

In areas controlled by Islamic militants, non-Muslim women are enslaved in
occupied territories. Many Islamists see the abolition of slavery as forced
upon Muslims by the West and want to revive the practice of
slavery.[48][49][50] (See: Slavery in 21st-century Islamism). In areas
controlled by Catholic priests, clerical abuse of nuns, including sexual
slavery, has been acknowledged by the Pope.[51][52]

Bride kidnapping, also known as marriage by abduction or marriage by captive,
is a form of forced marriage practised in some traditional cultures. Bride
kidnapping has reportedly occurred in countries spanning Central Asia, the
Caucasus region, parts of Africa, and among the Hmong in southeast Asia, the
Tzeltal in Mexico, and the Romani in Europe.[ _citation needed_ ] Though the
motivations behind bride kidnapping vary by region, the cultures with
traditions of marriage by abduction are generally patriarchal with a strong
social stigma against sex or pregnancy outside marriage and illegitimate
births.[53][54] In most cases, however, the men who resort to capturing a wife
are often of lower social status, whether because of poverty, disease, poor
character or criminality. In some cases, the couple collude together to elope
under the guise of a bride kidnapping, presenting their parents with a fait
accompli.[53][55] These men are sometimes deterred from legitimately seeking a
wife because of the payment the woman's family expects, the bride price (not
to be confused with a dowry, paid _by_ the woman's family).[53][56]

Bride kidnapping is distinguished from _raptio_ in that the former refers to
the abduction of one woman by one man (and/or his friends and relatives), and
is often a widespread and ongoing practice. The latter refers to the large-
scale abduction of women by groups of men, most frequently in a time of war
(see also war rape).[ _citation needed_ ] The Latin term _raptio_ refers to
abduction of women, either for marriage (by kidnapping or elopement) or
enslavement (particularly sexual slavery). In Roman Catholic canon law,
_raptio_ refers to the legal prohibition of matrimony if the bride was
abducted forcibly (Canon 1089 CIC).

The practice of _raptio_ is surmised to have existed since anthropological
antiquity. In Neolithic Europe, excavation of a Linear Pottery culture site at
Asparn-Schletz, Austria, unearthed the remains of numerous slain victims.
Among them, young adult females and children were clearly under-represented,
suggesting that perhaps the attackers had killed the men but abducted the
young females.[57]

Rape and sexual violence have accompanied warfare in virtually every known
historical era.[58] Before the 19th century, military circles supported the
notion that all persons, including unarmed women and children, were still the
enemy, with the belligerent (nation or person engaged in conflict) having
conquering rights over them.[59] "To the victor goes the spoils" has been a
war cry for centuries and women were included as part of the spoils of
war.[60] Institutionalised sexual slavery and enforced prostitution have been
documented in a number of wars, most notably the Second World War (See #During
the Second World War) and in the War in Bosnia.

Employing female and occasionally male slaves for prostitution was common in
the Hellenistic and Roman world. Ample references exist in literature, law,
military reports and art. A prostitute (slave or free) existed outside the
moral codex restricting sexuality in Greco-Roman society and enjoyed little
legal protection. See ancient Rome's law on rape as an example. Male
intercourse with a slave was not considered adultery by either society.

During the Chinese domination of Vietnam, Vietnamese girls were sold as sex
slaves to the Chinese.[61] A large trade developed where the native girls of
Vietnam were enslaved and brought north to the
Chinese.[62][63][64][65][66][67] Southern Yue girls were sexually eroticized
in Chinese literature and in poems written by Chinese who were exiled to the
south.[68]

In the 16th and 17th centuries, Portuguese visitors and their South Asian
_lascar_ (and sometimes African) crewmembers often engaged in slavery in
Japan, where they bought or captured young Japanese women and girls, who were
either used as sexual slaves on their ships or taken to Macau and other
Portuguese colonies in Southeast Asia, the Americas,[69] and India.[70] For
example, in Goa, a Portuguese colony in India, there was a community of
Japanese slaves and traders during the late 16th and 17th centuries.[69][70]

During the 1662 Siege of Fort Zeelandia in which Chinese Ming loyalist forces
commanded by Koxinga besieged and defeated the Dutch East India Company and
conquered Taiwan, the Chinese took Dutch women and children prisoner. The
Dutch missionary Antonius Hambroek, two of his daughters, and his wife were
among the Dutch prisoners of war with Koxinga. Koxinga sent Hambroek to Fort
Zeelandia demanding he persuade them to surrender or else Hambroek would be
killed when he returned. Hambroek returned to the Fort, where two of his other
daughters were. He urged the Fort not to surrender, and returned to Koxinga's
camp. He was then executed by decapitation, and in addition to this, a rumor
was spreading among the Chinese that the Dutch were encouraging the native
Taiwan aboriginals to kill Chinese, so Koxinga ordered the mass execution of
Dutch male prisoners in retaliation, in addition to a few women and children
also being killed. The surviving Dutch women and children were then turned
into slaves. Koxinga took Hambroek's teenage daughter as a
concubine,[71][72][73] and Dutch women were sold to Chinese soldiers to become
their wives, the daily journal of the Dutch fort recorded that "the best were
preserved for the use of the commanders, and then sold to the common soldiers.
Happy was she that fell to the lot of an unmarried man, being thereby freed
from vexations by the Chinese women, who are very jealous of their
husbands."[74] In 1684 some of these Dutch wives were still captives of the
Chinese.[75] Some Dutch physical looks like auburn and red hair among people
in regions of south Taiwan are a consequence of this episode of Dutch women
becoming concubines to the Chinese commanders.[74] The Chinese took Dutch
women as slave concubines and wives and they were never freed: in 1684 some
were reported to be living, in Quemoy a Dutch merchant was contacted with an
arrangement to release the prisoners which was proposed by a son of Koxinga's
but it came to nothing.[76] The Chinese officers used the Dutch women they
received as concubines.[74][77][78] The Dutch women were used for sexual
pleasure by Koxinga's commanders.[79] This event of Dutch women being
distributed to the Chinese soldiers and commanders was recorded in the daily
journal of the fort.[74] A teenage daughter of the Dutch missionary Anthonius
Hambroek became a concubine to Koxinga, she was described by the Dutch
commander Caeuw as "a very sweet and pleasing maiden".[80][81] Dutch language
accounts record this incident of Chinese taking Dutch women as concubines and
the date of Hambroek's daughter[82][83][84][85]

In the 19th and early 20th centuries, there was a network of Chinese
prostitutes trafficked to cities like Singapore, and a separate network of
Japanese prostitutes being trafficked across Asia, in countries such as China,
Japan, Korea, Singapore and British India, in what was then known as the
’Yellow Slave Traffic’. There was also a network of prostitutes from
continental Europe being trafficked to India, Ceylon, Singapore, China and
Japan at around the same time, in what was then known as the ’White Slave
Traffic’.[86] Karayuki-san (唐行きさん, literally "Ms. Gone-to-China" but actually
meaning Ms. Gone Abroad") were Japanese girls and women in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries who were trafficked from poverty stricken agricultural
prefectures in Japan to destinations in East Asia, Southeast Asia, Siberia
(Russian Far East), Manchuria, and British India to serve as prostitutes and
sexually serviced men from a variety of races, including Chinese, Europeans,
native Southeast Asians, and others. In the 19th and early 20th centuries,
there was a network of Japanese prostitutes being trafficked across Asia, in
countries such as China, Japan, Korea, Singapore and British India, in what
was then known as the ’Yellow Slave Traffic’.[86] The main destinations of
_karayuki-san_ included China (particularly Shanghai), Hong Kong, the
Philippines, Borneo, Sumatra,[87] Thailand, Indonesia, and the western USA (in
particular San Francisco). They were often sent to Western colonies in Asia
where there was a strong demand from Western military personnel and Chinese
men.[88] The experience of Japanese prostitutes in China was written about in
a book by a Japanese woman, Tomoko
Yamazaki.[89][90][91][92][93][94][95][96][97][98][99] Japanese girls were
easily trafficked abroad since Korean and Chinese ports did not require
Japanese citizens to use passports and the Japanese government realized that
money earned by the karayuki-san helped the Japanese economy since it was
being remitted,[100][101] and the Chinese boycott of Japanese products in 1919
led to reliance on revenue from the karayuki-san.[102] Since the Japanese
viewed non-westerners as inferior, the karayuki-san Japanese women felt
humiliated since they mainly sexually served Chinese men or native Southeast
Asians.[103][104] Borneo natives, Malaysians, Chinese, Japanese, French,
American, British and men from every race utilized the Japanese prostitutes of
Sandakan.[105] A Japanese woman named Osaki said that the men, Japanese,
Chinese, whites, and natives, were dealt with alike by the prostitutes
regardless of race, and that a Japanese prostitute's "most disgusting
customers" were Japanese men, while they used "kind enough" to describe
Chinese men, and the English and Americans were the second best clients, while
the native men were the best and fastest to have sex with.[106]

During World War II, Empire of Japan organised a governmental system of
"comfort women", which is a euphemism of military sex slaves for the estimated
200,000, mostly Korean, Chinese, and Filipino women who were forced into
sexual slavery in Japanese military "comfort stations" during World War
II.[107] Japan collected, carried, and confined Asian ladies coercively and
collusively to have sexual intercourse with Japan's soldiers during their
invasions across East Asia and Southeast Asia. Some Korean women claim that
these cases should be judged by an international tribunal as child sex
violence. The legal demand has been made because of the victims' anger at what
they see as the inequity of the existing legal measures and the denial of
Japan's involvement in child sex slavery and kidnapping. On 28 December 2015,
Japan and South Korea agreed that Japan would pay 1 billion Yen into a fund
for a Memorial Hall of comfort women.[108][109][110] Despite this agreement,
some Korean victims have complained that they were not consulted during the
negotiation process. They demand that Japan and Korea did not seek both the
legal recognition of their claim and the revision of Japanese history
textbooks.[111]

Slave trade, including trade of sex slaves,[112] fluctuated in certain regions
in the Middle East up until the 20th century.[113] These slaves came largely
from Sub-Saharan Africa (mainly _Zanj_ ), the Caucasus (mainly
Circassians),[114] Central Asia (mainly Sogdians)[115] and Central and Eastern
Europe (mainly _Saqaliba_ ).[116] The Barbary pirates also captured 1.25
million slaves from Western Europe between the sixteenth and nineteenth
centuries.[117][118]

In contrast to the Atlantic slave trade where the male-female ratio was 2:1 or
3:1, the Arab slave trade usually had a higher female:male ratio instead,
suggesting a general preference for female slaves. Concubinage and
reproduction served as incentives for importing female slaves (often
European), though many were also imported mainly for performing household
tasks.[119]

In English-speaking countries in the 19th and early 20th centuries, the phrase
"white slavery" was used to refer to sexual enslavement of white women. It was
particularly associated with accounts of women enslaved in Middle Eastern
harems, such as the so-called Circassian beauties.[120] The phrase gradually
came to be used as a euphemism for prostitution.[121] The phrase was
especially common in the context of the exploitation of minors, with the
implication that children and young women in such circumstances were not free
to decide their own fates.

In Victorian Britain, campaigning journalist William Thomas Stead, editor of
the _Pall Mall Gazette_ , procured a 13-year-old girl for £5, an amount then
equal to a labourer's monthly wage ( _see_ the Eliza Armstrong case). Moral
panic over the "traffic in women" rose to a peak in England in the 1880s. At
the time, "white slavery" was a natural target for defenders of public
morality and crusading journalists. The ensuing outcry led to the passage of
antislavery legislation in Parliament. Parliament passed the 1885 Criminal Law
Amendment Act, raising the age of consent from thirteen to sixteen in that
year.[122]

A subsequent scare occurred in the United States in the early twentieth
century, peaking in 1910, when Chicago's U.S. attorney announced (without
giving details) that an international crime ring was abducting young girls in
Europe, importing them, and forcing them to work in Chicago brothels. These
claims, and the panic they inflamed, led to the passage of the United States
White-Slave Traffic Act of 1910, generally known as the "Mann Act". It also
banned the interstate transport of females for immoral purposes. Its primary
intent was to address prostitution and immorality.[123]

Immigration inspectors at Ellis Island in New York City were held responsible
for questioning and screening European prostitutes from the U.S. Immigration
inspectors expressed frustration at the ineffectiveness of questioning in
determining if a European woman was a prostitute, and claimed that many were
"lying" and "framing skillful responses" to their questions. They were also
accused of negligence should they accept a fictitious address from an
immigrant or accept less-than-complete responses. Inspector Helen Bullis
investigated several homes of assignment in the Tenderloin district of New
York, and found brothels existed in the early 20th century in New York City.
She compiled a list of houses of prostitutes, their proprietors, and their
"inmates".[124] The New York inspection director wrote a report in 1907,
defending against accusations of negligence, saying there was no sense to the
public "panic", and he was doing everything he could to screen European
immigrants for prostitution, especially unmarried ones. In a report by the
Commissioner General of Immigration in 1914, the Commissioner said that many
prostitutes would intentionally marry American men to secure citizenship. He
said that for prostitutes, it was "no difficult task to secure a disreputable
citizen who will marry a prostitute" from Europe.

As early as the 1490s, Christopher Columbus established trade in sex slaves on
Hispaniola which included sex slaves as young as nine years old.[125][126]
Within 25 years of being colonized, the population of Hispaniola natives
declined, dying from enslavement, massacre or disease.[127]

From the beginning of African slavery in the North American colonies, white
men took enslaved African women as concubines or occasional mistresses. As
populations increased, slave women might be taken advantage of by white
overseers, planter's younger sons before they married, and other white men
associated with the slaveholders. Some were sold into brothels outright.

_Plaçage_ , a formalized system of concubinage among slave women or free
people of color, developed in Louisiana and particularly New Orleans by the
18th century. Young mixed-race women (considered highly desirable) would
receive a dowry or property as part of an associated settlement negotiated by
their mothers with white men. The fathers would often pay for education of
their mixed-race children born of these unions, especially sons, who might be
educated in France and enter the army. In recent years, at least three
historians ( _viz._ Kenneth Aslakson, Emily Clark, and Carol Schlueter) have
challenged the historicity of quadroon balls and have referred to the
institution of Plaçage as "a myth".[128][129]

But Paul Heinegg's research showed that most mixed-race, free black families
in the censuses of 1790–1810 were descended from unions between free white
women and African men, whether free, indentured servant or slave, that took
place in colonial Virginia. It had half the slaves in the colonies at the time
of the Revolution. In the early colonial years, the working class of
indentured servants and slaves often worked and lived together.[130]

From the 17th century, Virginia and other colonies passed laws determining the
social status of children born in the colonies. Under English common law in
England, children of two English subjects took the status of the father. But
Africans were never considered English subjects. To settle the issue of the
status of children born in the colony, Virginia passed a law in 1662 that
ruled that children would take the status of their mother at birth, under the
Roman legal principle known as _partus sequitur ventrem._ Thus all children
born to enslaved mothers were legally slaves, regardless of the paternity or
ancestry of their fathers. They were bound for life and could be sold like any
slave unless formally freed.

The term "white slaves" was sometimes used for those mixed-race or mulatto
slaves who had a visibly high proportion of European ancestry. Among the most
notable at the turn of the 19th century was Sally Hemings, who was 3/4 white
and believed by historians to be a half sister of Martha Wayles Skelton
Jefferson by their common father John Wayles. Hemings is known for having four
surviving children from her decades-long concubinage with President Thomas
Jefferson; they were 7/8 European by ancestry. Three of these mixed-race
children passed easily into white society as adults (Jefferson freed them all
– two informally and two in his will). Three of his Hemings grandsons served
as white men in the Union Regular Army in the American Civil War; John Wayles
Jefferson advanced to the rank of colonel.

Not all white fathers abandoned their slave children; some provided them with
education, apprenticeships, or capital; some wealthy planters sent their
mixed-race children to the North for education and sometimes for freedom. Some
men freed both their slave mistresses and their mixed-race children,
especially in the 20 years after the American Revolution, but southern
legislatures made such manumissions more difficult. Both Mary Chesnut and
Fanny Kemble wrote in the 19th century about the scandal of white men having
their mistresses and natural mixed-race children as part of their extended
households. Numerous mixed-race families were begun before the Civil War, and
many originated in the Upper South.

After slaves were emancipated, many states passed anti-miscegenation laws,
which prohibited interracial marriage between whites and non-whites.

Zora Neale Hurston wrote about contemporary sexual practices in her
anthropological studies in the 1930s of the turpentine camps of North Florida.
She noted that white men with power often forced black women into sexual
relationships.

Although she never named the practice as "paramour rights," author C. Arthur
Ellis ascribed this term to the fictionalized Hurston in his book, _Zora
Hurston and the Strange Case of Ruby McCollum._[131] The same character
asserted that the death knell of paramour rights was sounded by the trial of
Ruby McCollum, a black woman who murdered Dr. C. Leroy Adams, in Live Oak,
Florida, in 1952. McCollum had testified that Adams forced her into sex and
bearing his child. Journalist Hurston covered McCollum's trial in 1952 for the
_Pittsburgh Courier_. McCollum's case was further explored in the 2015
documentary _You Belong to Me: Sex, Race and Murder in the South._

The Chinese Tanka females were sold from Guangzhou to work as prostitutes for
the overseas Chinese male community in the United States.[132] During the
California Gold Rush in the late 1840s, Chinese merchants transported
thousands of young Chinese girls, including babies, from China to the United
States. They sold the girls into sexual slavery within the red light district
of San Francisco. Girls could be bought for $40 (about $1104 in 2013 dollars)
in Guangzhou and sold for $400 (about $11,040 in 2013 dollars) in the United
States. Many of these girls were forced into opium addiction and lived their
entire lives as prostitutes.[133][134]

During World War II, Germany established brothels in Nazi concentration camps
(Lagerbordell). The women forced to work in these brothels came from the
Ravensbrück concentration camp,[135] Soldier's brothels (Wehrmachtsbordell)
were usually organized in already established brothels or in hotels
confiscated by the Germans. The leaders of the Wehrmacht became interested in
running their own brothels when sexual disease spread among the soldiers. In
the controlled brothels, the women were checked frequently to avoid and treat
sexually transmittable infections (STI).

It is estimated that a minimum of 34,140 women from occupied states were
forced to work as prostitutes during the Third Reich.[136] In occupied Europe,
the local women were often forced into prostitution. On 3 May 1941 the Foreign
Ministry of the Polish government-in-exile issued a document describing the
mass Nazi raids made in Polish cities with the goal of capturing young women,
who later were forced to work in brothels used by German soldiers and
officers. Women often tried to escape from such facilities, with at least one
mass escape known to have been attempted by women in Norway.

"Comfort women" are a widely publicised example of sexual slavery. The term
refers to the women, from occupied countries, who were forced to serve as sex
slaves in the Japanese army's camps during World War II. Estimates vary as to
how many women were involved, with numbers ranging from as low as 20,000 from
some Japanese scholars to as high as 410,000 from some Chinese scholars.[137]
The numbers are still being researched and debated. The majority of women were
taken from Korea, China, and other occupied territories part of the Greater
East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere. They were often recruited by kidnapping or
deception to serve as sex slaves.[138][139][140][141] Sometimes women were
raped to the point of death, or killed by torture, such as having their
breasts sliced off or having their abdomens slit open.[142] Each slave
reportedly suffered "an average of 10 rapes per day (considered by some to be
a low estimate), for a five-day work week; this figure can be extrapolated to
estimate that each 'comfort girl' was raped around 50 times per week or 2,500
times per year. For three years of service – the average – a comfort girl
would have been raped 7,500 times." (Parker, 1995 United Nations Commissions
on Human Rights)[143]

Chuo University professor Yoshiaki Yoshimi states there were about 2,000
centers where as many as 200,000 Japanese, Chinese, Korean, Filipino,
Taiwanese, Burmese, Indonesian, Dutch and Australian women were interned and
used as sex slaves.[144]

The Recreation and Amusement Association (特殊慰安施設協会, __Tokushu Ian Shisetsu
Kyōkai_ (Special Comfort Facility Association)_) (RAA) was the largest of the
organizations established by the Japanese government to provide organized
prostitution and other leisure facilities for occupying Allied troops
immediately following World War II.[145]

The RAA established its first brothel on 28 August: the Komachien in Ōmori. By
December 1945, the RAA owned 34 facilities, 16 of which were "comfort
stations". The total number of prostitutes employed by the RAA amounted to
55,000 at its peak.

The dispersal of prostitution made it harder for GHQ to control STIs and also
caused an increase in rapes by GIs, from an average of 40 a day before the
SCAP order to an estimated 330 per day immediately after.[ _citation needed_ ]

During the Korean War, the South Korean military institutionalized a "special
comfort unit" similar to the one used by the Japanese military during World
War II, kidnapping and pressing several North Korean women into sexual
slavery. Until recently, very little was known about this apart from
testimonies of retired generals and soldiers who had fought in the war. In
February 2002, Korean sociologist Kim Kwi-ok wrote the first scholarly work on
Korea's comfort women through official records.[146]

The South Korean "comfort" system was organized around three operations.
First, there were "special comfort units" called T'uksu Wiandae (특수위안대,
特殊慰安隊), which operated from seven different stations. Second, there were
mobile units of comfort women that visited barracks. Third, there were
prostitutes who worked in private brothels that were hired by the military.
Although it is still not clear how recruitment of these comfort women were
organized in the South, South Korean agents were known to have kidnapped some
of the women from the North.[147]

According to anthropologist Chunghee Sarah Soh, the South Korean military's
use of comfort women has produced "virtually no societal response," despite
the country's women's movement's support for Korean comfort women within the
Japanese military. Both Kim and Soh argue that this system is a legacy of
Japanese colonialism, as many of Korea's army leadership were trained by the
Japanese military. Both the Korean and Japanese militaries referred to these
comfort women as "military supplies" in official documents and personal
memoirs. The South Korean armed forces also used the same arguments as the
Japanese military to justify the use of comfort women, viewing them as a
"necessary social evil" that would raise soldiers' morale and prevent
rape.[148]

Official estimates of individuals in sexual slavery worldwide vary. In 2001
the International Organization for Migration estimated 400,000, the Federal
Bureau of Investigation estimated 700,000 and UNICEF estimated 1.75
million.[149] In areas controlled by Catholic priests, clerical abuse of nuns,
including sexual slavery, has been acknowledged by the Pope.[51][52]

In Africa the colonial powers abolished slavery in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries. However, in areas outside their jurisdiction, such as the
Mahdist empire in Sudan, the practice continued to thrive. Institutional
slavery has been banned worldwide, but there are numerous reports of women sex
slaves in areas without effective government control, such as Sudan,[150]
Liberia,[151] Sierra Leone,[152] northern Uganda,[153] Congo,[154] Niger[155]
and Mauritania.[156] In Ghana, Togo and Benin, a form of religious
prostitution known as _trokosi_ ("ritual servitude") forcibly keeps thousands
of girls and women in traditional shrines as "wives of the gods", where
priests perform the sexual function in place of the gods.[157]

In April 2014, Boko Haram kidnapped 276 female students from Chibok, Borno, a
state of Nigeria. More than 50 of them soon escaped, but the remainder have
not been released. Instead Shekau, who has a reward of $7 million offered by
the United States Department of State since June 2013 for information leading
to his capture, announced his intention of selling them into slavery.

The _San Francisco Chronicle_ reported in 2006 that in the 21st century,
women, mostly from South America, Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe and the
former Soviet Union, are trafficked into the United States for the purposes of
sexual slavery.[158] A 2006 ABC News story stated that, contrary to existing
misconceptions, American citizens may also be coerced into sex slavery.[159]

In 2001 the United States State Department estimated that 50,000 to 100,000
women and girls are trafficked each year into the United States. In 2003, the
State Department report estimated that a total of 18,000 to 20,000 individuals
were trafficked into the United States for either forced labor or sexual
exploitation. The June 2004 report estimated the total trafficked annually at
between 14,500 and 17,500.[160] The Bush administration set up 42 Justice
Department task forces and spent more than $150 million on attempts to reduce
human trafficking. However, in the seven years since the law was passed, the
administration has identified only 1,362 victims of human trafficking brought
into the United States since 2000, nowhere near the 50,000 or more per year
the government had estimated.[161]

The Girl’s Education & Mentoring Services (GEMS), an organization based in New
York, claims that the majority of girls in the sex trade were abused as
children. Poverty and a lack of education play major roles in the lives of
many women in the sex industry.

According to a report conducted by the University of Pennsylvania, anywhere
from 100,000 up to 300,000 American children at any given time may be at risk
of exploitation due to factors such as drug use, homelessness, or other
factors connected with increased risk for commercial sexual exploitation.[162]
However, the report emphasized, "The numbers presented in these exhibits do
not, therefore, reflect the actual number of cases of CSEC in the United
States but, rather, what we estimate to be the number of children ‘at risk’ of
commercial sexual exploitation."[162]

The 2010 Trafficking in Persons report described the United States as, "a
source, transit, and destination country for men, women, and children
subjected to trafficking in persons, specifically forced labor, debt bondage,
and forced prostitution."[163] Sexual slavery in the United States may occur
in multiple forms and in multiple venues. Sex trafficking in the United States
may be present in Asian massage parlors, Mexican cantina bars, residential
brothels, or street-based pimp-controlled prostitution. The anti-trafficking
community in the United States is debating the extent of sexual slavery. Some
groups argue that exploitation is inherent in the act of commercial sex, while
other groups take a stricter approach to defining sexual slavery, considering
an element of force, fraud or coercion to be necessary for sex slavery to
exist.

The prostitutes in illegal massage parlors may be forced to work out of
apartment complexes for many hours a day.[164] Many clients may not realize
that some of the women who work in these massage sex parlors have actually
been forced into prostitution.[164] The women may initially be lured into the
US under false pretenses. In huge debt to their 'owners', they are forced to
earn enough to eventually "buy" their freedom.[164] In some cases women who
have been sex trafficked may be forced to undergo plastic surgery or
abortions.[165] A chapter in _The Slave Next Door_ (2009) reports that human
trafficking and sexual enslavement are not limited to any specific location or
social class. It concludes that individuals in society need to be alert to
report suspicious behavior, because the psychological and physical abuse
occurs which can often leave a victim unable to escape on their own.[166]

In 2000 Congress created the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection
Act with tougher punishments for sex traffickers. It provides for the
possibility for former sex slaves to obtain a T-1 visa.[164] To obtain the
visa women must, "prove they were enslaved by 'force, fraud or
coercion'."[164] The visa allows former victims of sex trafficking to stay in
the United States for 3 years and then apply for a green card.[164]

The Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (FLDS) has been
suspected of trafficking girls across state lines, as well as across the
US–Canada[167] and US–Mexico borders,[168] for the purpose of sometimes
involuntary plural marriage and sexual abuse.[169] The FLDS is suspected by
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police of having trafficked more than 30 under-age
girls from Canada to the United States between the late 1990s and 2006 to be
entered into polygamous marriages.[167] RCMP spokesman Dan Moskaluk said of
the FLDS's activities: "In essence, it's human trafficking in connection with
illicit sexual activity."[170] According to the _Vancouver Sun,_ it's unclear
whether or not Canada's anti-human trafficking statute can be effectively
applied against the FLDS's pre-2005 activities, because the statute may not be
able to be applied retroactively.[171] An earlier three-year-long
investigation by local authorities in British Columbia into allegations of
sexual abuse, human trafficking, and forced marriages by the FLDS resulted in
no charges, but did result in legislative change.[172] Former FLDS members
have also alleged that children belonging to the sect were forced to perform
sexual acts as children upon older men while being unable to leave. This has
been described by numerous former members as sexual slavery, and was reported
as such by the _Sydney Morning Herald_ ,[173][174] One former resident of
Yearning for Zion, Kathleen Mackert, stated: "I was required to perform oral
sex on my father when I was seven, and it escalated from there."[174]

The Trafficking in Persons Report of 2007 from the US Department of State says
that sexual slavery exists in the Arab states of the Persian Gulf, where women
and children may be trafficked from the post-Soviet states, Eastern Europe,
Far East, Africa, South Asia or other parts of the Middle East.[175][176][177]

According to media reports from late 2014 the Islamic State of Iraq and the
Levant (ISIL) was selling Yazidis and Christian women as
slaves.[178][179][180] According to Haleh Esfandiari of the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars, after ISIL militants have captured an area
"[t]hey usually take the older women to a makeshift slave market and try to
sell them."[181] In mid-October 2014 the U.N. estimated that 5,000 to 7,000
Yazidi women and children were abducted by ISIL and sold into
slavery.[182][183]

In the digital magazine _Dabiq_ , ISIL claimed religious justification for
enslaving Yazidi women whom they consider to be from a heretical sect. ISIL
claimed that the Yazidi are idol worshipers and their enslavement part of the
old shariah practice of spoils of war.[184][185][186][187][188] ISIL appealed
to apocalyptic beliefs and "claimed justification by a Hadith that they
interpret as portraying the revival of slavery as a precursor to the end of
the world."[189] In late September 2014, 126 Islamic scholars from around the
Muslim world signed an open letter to the Islamic State's leader Abu Bakr al-
Baghdadi, rejecting his group's interpretations of the Qur'an and hadith to
justify its actions.[190][191] The letter accuses the group of instigating
fitna—sedition—by instituting slavery under its rule in contravention of the
anti-slavery consensus of the Islamic scholarly community.[192] In late 2014
ISIL released a pamphlet on the treatment of female
slaves.[193][194][195][196][197][198] In January 2015, further rules for sex
slaves were announced.[199]

Selling women and children still occurs in the Middle East.[200] Yazidi women
have also reported being raped and used as sexual slave by members of ISIS. In
November 2015 it was reported that "around 2,000 women and girls are still
being bought and sold in ISIS-controlled areas. The young become sex slaves
and older women are beaten and used as house slaves, according to survivors
and accounts from ISIS militants".[201]

In 2007, the Ministry of Women and Child Development estimated that there are
around 2.8 million sex workers in India, with 35 percent of them entering the
trade before the age of 18 years.[202][203] The number of prostitutes has also
doubled in the recent decade.[204] One news article states that an estimated
200,000 Nepalese girls have been trafficked to red light areas of India.[205]
Nepalese women and girls, especially virgins, are reportedly favoured in India
because of their fair skin and young looks.[206][207] One report estimates
that every year between 5,000 and 7,000 Nepalese girls are trafficked into the
red-light districts in Indian cities, and that many of the girls may only be 9
or 10 years old.[208]

In Pakistan, young girls have been sold by their families to big-city brothel
owners. Often this happens due to poverty or debt, whereby the family has no
other way to raise the money than to sell the young girl.[209] Cases have also
been reported where wives and sisters have been sold to brothels to raise
money for gambling, drinking or drug addictions. Sex slaves are reportedly
also bought by 'agents' in Afghanistan who trick young girls into coming to
Pakistan for well-paying jobs. Once in Pakistan they are taken to brothels
(called _kharabat_ ) and forced into sexual slavery, some for many
years.[210][211] Beardless young boys in Afghanistan may be sold as bacha bazi
for use in dancing and prostitution (pederasty), and are sometimes valued in
tens of thousands of dollars.[212]

In January 2010, the Supreme Court of India stated that India is "becoming a
hub" for large-scale child prostitution rackets. It suggested setting up of a
special investigating agency to tackle the growing problem.[213]

An article about the Rescue Foundation in _New Internationalist_ magazine
states that "according to Save the Children India, clients now prefer 10- to
12-year-old girls". The same article attributes the rising number of
prostitutes believed to have contracted HIV in India’s brothels as a factor in
India becoming the country with the second-largest number of people living
with HIV/AIDS in the world, behind South Africa.[214]

In Thailand, the Health System Research Institute reported in 2005 that
children in prostitution make up 40% of Thailand's prostitutes.[15] It said
that a proportion of prostitutes over the age of 18, including foreign
nationals mostly from Myanmar, China's Yunnan province, Laos and Cambodia, are
also in some state of forced sexual servitude.[215] In 1996, the police in
Bangkok estimated that there were at least 5,000 Russian prostitutes working
in Thailand, many of whom had arrived through networks controlled by Russian
gangs.[216] The Tourism Police Bureau in 1997 stated that there were 500
Chinese and 200 European women in prostitution in Bangkok, many of whom
entered Thailand illegally, often through Burma and Laos. Earlier reports,
however, suggest different figures. (Police Colonel Sanit Meephan, deputy
chief of Tourism Police Bureau, "Thailand popular haunt for foreign
prostitutes", _The Nation_ , 15 January 1997)

Part of the challenge in quantifying and eliminating sexual slavery in
Thailand and Asia generally is the high rate of police corruption in the
region. There are documented cases where Thai and other area law enforcement
officials worked with human traffickers, even to the extent of returning
escaped child sex slaves to brothels.[217]

Ethnic Rohingya women are kidnapped by Myanmar military and used as sex
slave[218] Many Rohingya women were detained at a human trafficking syndicate
transit camp in Padang Besar, Thailand, were treated like sex slaves.[219]

In the Netherlands, the Bureau of the Dutch Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human
Beings in 2005 estimated that there are from 1,000 to 7,000 trafficking
victims a year. Most police investigations relate to legal sex businesses,
with all sectors of prostitution being well represented, but with window
brothels being particularly overrepresented.[220][221][222] Dutch news site
Expatica reported that in 2008, there were 809 registered trafficking victims
in the Netherlands; out of those 763 were women and at least 60 percent of
them were reportedly forced to work in the sex industry. Of reported victims,
those from Hungary were all female and all forced into prostitution.[223][224]

In Germany, the trafficking of women from Eastern Europe is often organized by
people from that same region. German authorities identified 676 sex-
trafficking victims in 2008, compared with 689 in 2007.[225] The German
Federal Police Office BKA reported in 2006 a total of 357 completed
investigations of human trafficking, with 775 victims. Thirty-five percent of
the suspects were Germans born in Germany and 8% were German citizens born
outside Germany.[226]

In Greece, according to NGO estimates in 2008, there may be a total
13,000–14,000 trafficking victims of all types in the country at any given
time. Major countries of origin for trafficking victims brought into Greece
include Nigeria, Ukraine, Russia, Bulgaria, Albania, Moldova, Romania and
Belarus.[227]

In Switzerland, the police estimated in 2006 that there may be between 1,500
and 3,000 victims of all types of human trafficking. The organizers and their
victims generally come from Hungary, Slovakia, Romania, Ukraine, Moldova,
Lithuania, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Thailand and Cambodia, and, to a
lesser extent, Africa.[228]

In Belgium, in 2007, prosecutors handled a total of 418 trafficking cases,
including 219 economic exploitation and 168 sexual exploitation cases. In the
same year, the federal judicial police handled 196 trafficking files, compared
with 184 in 2006. In 2007 the police arrested 342 persons for smuggling and
trafficking-related crimes.[229] A recent report by RiskMonitor foundation
estimated that 70% of the prostitutes who work in Belgium are from
Bulgaria.[230]

In Austria, Vienna has the largest number of reported trafficking cases,
although trafficking is also a problem in urban centers such as Graz, Linz,
Salzburg, and Innsbruck. The NGO Lateinamerikanische Frauen in
Oesterreich–Interventionsstelle fuer Betroffene des Frauenhandels (LEFOE-IBF)
reported assisting 108 victims of all types of human trafficking in 2006, down
from 151 in 2005.[231]

In Spain, in 2007, officials identified 1,035 sex trafficking victims and 445
labor trafficking victims.[232]

