**Shiri Freda Appleby** (born December 7, 1978) is an American actress and
director. She is best known for her leading roles as Liz Parker in the WB/UPN
science fiction drama series _Roswell_ (1999–2002) and Rachel Goldberg in the
Lifetime/Hulu drama series _Unreal_ (2015–2018).[1]

Her major film credits include _A Time for Dancing_ (2000), _Swimfan_ (2002),
_Havoc_ (2005), _Charlie Wilson's War_ (2007), and _The Devil's Candy_ (2015).

Appleby also starred as intern Daria Wade in the final season of the NBC
medical drama series _ER_ (2008–2009). She later starred as Cate Cassidy in
The CW drama series _Life Unexpected_ (2010–2011) and as Lucy Lambert in the
web comedy series _Dating Rules from My Future Self_ (2012). Appleby also had
recurring roles on the NBC drama series _Chicago Fire_ (2012–2013) and the HBO
comedy-drama series _Girls_ (2013–2014).[2]

Appleby was born in Los Angeles, California, the daughter of Dina Appleby (née
Bouader), a Jewish day school teacher, and Jerry Appleby, a telecommunications
executive.[3][4] Her mother is Israeli and of Sephardic-Moroccan Jewish
background, and her father is of Ashkenazi Jewish descent.[5][6][7] Appleby's
mother was an actress in Israel.[8] She and her younger brother Evan[9] were
raised in Calabasas in Los Angeles County. They kept kosher in their home
growing up.[7]

Appleby graduated from Calabasas High School in 1997.[6] She attended
University of Southern California from 1998 to 1999, where she studied
English.[10] After two years she got the starring role in _Roswell_ and was
working steadily, but while shooting _Life Unexpected_ in 2010, Appleby
started to work towards a psychology degree from the online University of
Phoenix. It took her 14 months—from start to finish, with a large chunk of
time spent working, to complete the degree, which she did in 2012.[11]

Appleby began her acting career at the age of four, starting with
advertisements for various products such as Cheerios and M&M's. She started
acting and taking acting classes because her parents were concerned that she
was so shy and introverted.[8] Her first advertisement was for Raisin Bran,
but it was never aired. She made guest appearances on many television
programs, most notably _thirtysomething_ (1987),[6] _Doogie Howser, M.D._
(1989), _ER_ (1994), _Baywatch_ (1989), _Xena: Warrior Princess_ (1995), _7th
Heaven_ (1997), _Beverly Hills, 90210_ (1990), before landing her break-out
role in the series _Roswell_ (1999–2002), where she tried out for the roles of
Isabel and Maria before landing the leading role of Liz Parker.[12]

Appleby has been featured in a number of music videos, such as Bon Jovi's
video for "It's My Life" with Will Estes, and the 2004 video for the song "I
Don't Want to Be" by Gavin DeGraw, opposite Scott Mechlowicz. She also
appeared in Sense Field's music video for "Save Yourself," which is part of
the _Roswell_ soundtrack and featured in the first season DVD box set.[13]

In 2006, she had a recurring role on the short-lived ABC drama _Six Degrees_
as Anya, a young assistant in a relationship with a much older photographer.
Later that year, she played Hildy Young in the new USA Network series _To Love
and Die_ , that began airing in late December 2008. She also participated in a
short film called _Carjacking_ directed by Dan Passman and co-starring Geoff
Stults.

In 2007, she appeared in the movie _What Love Is_ alongside Cuba Gooding Jr.,
Matthew Lillard, and Anne Heche. She also participated in another short film,
_Love Like Wind_ , from Shaolin Film Productions. At the end of the year, she
appeared as Charlie Wilson's press secretary in the film _Charlie Wilson's
War_ , which stars Tom Hanks and Julia Roberts. In 2008, Appleby had a
recurring role on the 15th and final season of _ER_ (her second time on the
show), playing an intern named Daria Wade.

In 2010, Appleby starred in The CW network drama _Life Unexpected_ as Cate
Cassidy, a radio talk show host whose daughter whom she gave up for adoption
becomes a part of her life.[14] The show was canceled after two seasons.

In 2012, Appleby starred as the main character of _Dating Rules from My Future
Self,_ which she also produced.[15]

In 2013, she had a role in the Lena Dunham HBO series, _Girls,_ which was
controversial for its portrayal of male ejaculate.[2] She said the role
allowed her to break out of a career where she was often typecast as being
sweet.[16] Appleby said that she got the role because she was shadowing
director Jesse Peretz (as she is interested in directing), and talked with
_Girls_ producer Jenni Konner, whom she was friendly[ _vague_ ] with. Konner
asked her if she would be interested in the part.[17]

In 2013, she was cast in the leading role in the Lifetime drama/dark comedy
series _Unreal_ , a show about the inner workings of a reality show (a show
within a show), which premiered on June 1, 2015, and was produced by former
_The Bachelor_ producer, Sarah Gertrude Shapiro and writer Marti Noxon.[18] To
research her role as a reality show dating show producer, Appleby said that
she spent time with a producer to quiz them about the work.[16] She said that
one of the appeals of the show was that the central focus was not about her
character being in a romantic relationship.[15] The show garnered strong
reviews and had been picked up for four seasons.[19][20][21] In 2016, Appleby
directed her first episode of _Unreal_ , titled "Casualty". She went on to
direct multiple episodes of the series. In July 2018, the series ended after
four seasons.[22]

In Hebrew, the word _shiri_ means either "my song" or "my poem" or simply
"sing" (first person female imperative). Appleby said her parents said that
when she was born, she was like the song in their hearts.[8]

She has a scar above her left eyebrow that she got when a neighbor's dog bit
her when she was young. To get over her fear of dogs, she went on the show
_Emergency Vets_ , accompanying staff veterinarian Dr. Kevin Fitzgerald (she
also overcame another phobia in the same episode by holding a live snake, one
of Fitzgerald's patients) and shortly after adopted a tabby cat, which she
named Abby.[23]

In July 2012, Appleby got engaged to her boyfriend of two years, chef and
restaurateur Jon Shook, during a trip to Ventotene, Italy.[24] Shook is the
co-owner with Vinny Dotolo of the Los Angeles restaurants Animal, Son of a
Gun, Trois Mec, and Jon & Vinny's.[25][26][27] Shook said that he met Appleby
through his business partner Dotolo's wife, who was friends with Appleby.[26]

In December 2012, the couple announced that they were expecting their first
child in early 2013.[28] Appleby gave birth to a girl, Natalie Bouader Shook,
on March 23, 2013.[29] They have since married.[30] Their second child, son
Owen Lee Shook was born on December 17, 2015.[31]

