**Soybean oil** is a vegetable oil extracted from the seeds of the soybean (
_Glycine max_ ). It is one of the most widely consumed cooking oils. As a
drying oil, processed soybean oil is also used as a base for printing inks
(soy ink) and oil paints.

Chinese records dating prior to 2000 B.C. mention use of cultivated soybeans
to produce edible soy oil.[1] Ancient Chinese literature reveals that soybeans
were extensively cultivated and highly valued as a use for the soybean oil
production process before written records were kept.[2]

To produce soybean oil, the soybeans are cracked, adjusted for moisture
content, heated to between 60 and 88 °C (140–190 °F), rolled into flakes, and
solvent-extracted with hexanes. The oil is then refined, blended for different
applications, and sometimes hydrogenated. Soybean oils, both liquid and
partially hydrogenated are sold as "vegetable oil," or are ingredients in a
wide variety of processed foods. Most of the remaining residue (soybean meal)
is used as animal feed.

In the 2002–2003 growing season, 30.6 million tons (MT) of soybean oil were
produced worldwide, constituting about half of worldwide edible vegetable oil
production, and thirty percent of all fats and oils produced, including animal
fats and oils derived from tropical plants.[3] In 2018-2019, world production
was at 57.4 MT with the leading producers including China (16.6 MT), US (10.9
MT), Argentina (8.4 MT), Brazil (8.2 MT), and EU (3.2 MT).[4]

Per 100 g, soybean oil has 16 g of saturated fat, 23 g of monounsaturated fat,
and 58 g of polyunsaturated fat.[5][6] The major unsaturated fatty acids in
soybean oil triglycerides are the polyunsaturates alpha-linolenic acid
(C-18:3), 7-10%, and linoleic acid (C-18:2), 51%; and the monounsaturate oleic
acid (C-18:1), 23%.[7] It also contains the saturated fatty acids stearic acid
(C-18:0), 4%, and palmitic acid (C-16:0), 10%.

The high-proportion of oxidation-prone polyunsaturated fatty acid is
undesirable for some uses, such as cooking oils. Three companies, Monsanto
Company, DuPont/Bunge, and Asoyia in 2004 introduced low linolenic Roundup
Ready soybeans. Hydrogenation may be used to reduce the unsaturation in
linolenic acid. The resulting oil is called hydrogenated soybean oil. If the
hydrogenation is only partially complete, the oil may contain small amounts of
trans fat.

232 °C (450 °F)[16]

107 °C (225 °F)

166 °C (330 °F)[21]

Soybean oil is mostly used for frying and baking. It is also used as a
condiment for salads.

Soybean oil is one of many drying oils, which means that it will slowly harden
(due to free-radical based polymerization) upon exposure to air, forming a
flexible, transparent, and waterproof solid. Because of this property, it is
used in some printing ink and oil paint formulations. However, other oils
(such as linseed oil) may be superior for some drying oil applications.

While soybean oil has no direct insect repellent activity, it is used as a
fixative to extend the short duration of action of essential oils such as
geranium oil in several commercial products.[38][39]

Soybean oil is traded at the Chicago Board of Trade in contracts of 60,000
pounds at a time. Prices are listed in cents and hundredths of a cent per
pound.

