**Spoon** is an American rock band formed in Austin, Texas. The band comprises
Britt Daniel (vocals, guitar), Jim Eno (drums), Alex Fischel (keyboards,
guitar)[3] and Gerardo Larios (guitar, keyboards).[4] Critics have described
the band's musical style as indie rock,[5][6] indie pop,[6][7] art rock,[8][9]
and experimental rock.[10]

Formed in 1993 in Austin, Texas by Daniel and Eno, Spoon released their debut
studio album, _Telephono_ , in 1996. Their next full-length, _A Series of
Sneaks_ , was released in 1998 on Elektra Records. The band subsequently
signed with Merge Records, where Spoon achieved greater commercial and
critical prominence with the albums _Girls Can Tell_ (2001), _Kill the
Moonlight_ (2002), _Gimme Fiction_ (2005), _Ga Ga Ga Ga Ga_ (2007),
_Transference_ (2010), and _They Want My Soul_ (2014). The band's ninth album,
_Hot Thoughts_ , was released on March 17, 2017, on Matador Records.

The band was formed in late 1993 by the lead singer and guitarist Britt Daniel
and the drummer Jim Eno, after the two met as members of the Alien Beats.[11]
The name Spoon was chosen to honor the 1970s German avant-garde band Can,
whose hit song "Spoon" was the theme song to the 1985 movie _Jagged Edge_ (
_Das Messer_ ) in the United States.[12] Eno describes Spoon's music as
"psychedelic".[13]

Spoon's first recording was the vinyl release of the EP _Nefarious_ in May
1994.[11] In 1995 the band signed with Matador Records, and within a year,
Spoon released its first full-length LP _Telephono_ in 1996. The album was met
with mixed reviews, with critics often comparing their sound with the likes of
Pavement, Pixies and Wire.[14] But comparisons aside, _Telephono_ showed signs
of a band slipping free of its influences, mixing post-punk with a blend of
pop.[15]

Less than a year later, Spoon released its second EP, _Soft Effects_ , which
served as a transition to their more distinctive, honed sound.[16] Unlike its
predecessors, _Soft Effects_ was less noisy and brash, showcasing a more
sophisticated, minimalist approach.[17]

In late 1996, Spoon was playing a gig at the Argo in Denton, Texas with Ed
Cooper and local band Maxine's Radiator, which then featured Josh Zarbo on
bass. Zarbo was invited to audition for Daniel and Eno in 1997, and
subsequently became the band's full-time bassist until his permanent departure
in 2007.[18]

After the release of _Soft Effects_ , Spoon signed to Elektra Records in 1998.
Appropriately enough, Elektra had also been the record label that found and
developed the Pixies. [19]Through Elektra the band released _A Series of
Sneaks_ in May 1998. The album did not sell as well as the label had hoped;
merely four months after the release of _Sneaks_ , Spoon's Elektra A&R man Ron
Laffitte quit his job and that week the band was dropped from the label.[20]
Angry with Laffitte, who had promised to stick with the band, Spoon recorded a
vindictive yet humorously-titled two-song concept single entitled "The Agony
of Laffitte," which was released by Saddle Creek Records. They lamented their
experience with the music business executive and questioned his motivations
with the songs "The Agony of Laffitte" and "Laffitte Don't Fail Me Now".[21]

Spoon signed with the indie rock label Merge Records and released the _Love
Ways_ EP in 2000.[17] They did this without bassist Josh Zarbo, who had
briefly left the band.[22] In 2001, Spoon released its third LP entitled
_Girls Can Tell_. The new record was a success, selling more copies than both
their previous LP releases combined.[23] The band’s next release in 2002,
_Kill the Moonlight_ had similar success.[23] _Kill the Moonlight_ also
contained the single, "The Way We Get By", which was popularized by its
placement on the movie _Stranger than Fiction_ (released later, in 2006) as
well as the teen drama _The O.C._ [24] and on the first episode of the
American version of the series Shameless. Their next album, _Gimme Fiction_ ,
was released in May 2005, and debuted at number 44 on the _Billboard_ 200,
selling more than 160,000 copies.[25]

Spoon’s Britt Daniel collaborated with Brian Reitzell to compose and arrange
the soundtrack for the 2006 film _Stranger than Fiction_. The soundtrack
consists chiefly of music performed by Spoon, and according to the liner notes
of the official soundtrack, Brian Reitzell collaborated with Britt Daniel to
compose the score, while also adapting several tracks from _Kill the
Moonlight_ and _Gimme Fiction_ into instrumental versions of the songs.

On July 10, 2007, _Ga Ga Ga Ga Ga_ was released and debuted at number 10 on
the _Billboard_ 200.[26] Since the release of _Kill the Moonlight_ in 2002,
Spoon has performed on late night talk shows, such as _Late Show with David
Letterman_ , _Late Night with Conan O'Brien_ , _The Late Late Show with Craig
Ferguson_ , _Last Call with Carson Daly_ , and _The Tonight Show with Conan
O'Brien_ as well as the PBS show _Austin City Limits_. They were also musical
guests on _Saturday Night Live_ on October 6, 2007, where they performed "The
Underdog"[27] and "You Got Yr. Cherry Bomb".[28]

In 2009, the review aggregator Metacritic ranked Spoon as its "Top overall
artist of the decade", based on the band's consistently high review scores
between 2000 and 2009, among other factors.[29] On January 18, 2010, the band
released its seventh studio album, _Transference_. It debuted at No. 4 on the
_Billboard_ 200, selling 53,000 copies in its first week. Their song "The
Mystery Zone" was also chosen as the Starbucks iTunes Pick of the Week on
January 26, 2010.[30] Later that year, Spoon recorded the title track on the
album _See My Friends_ in collaboration with Ray Davies.

On April 12, 2010, Spoon made a guest appearance on Conan O'Brien's The
Legally Prohibited from Being Funny on Television Tour in Eugene, Oregon,
where they performed the song "I Summon You" from their album _Gimme
Fiction_.[31]

Spoon released their eighth full-length album, _They Want My Soul_ , on August
5, 2014. It was their first record released by Loma Vista Recordings, after
five records on Merge.[32] It was recorded with Joe Chicarelli and Dave
Fridmann.[33] That year they took part in the Hamilton, Ontario
Supercrawl.[34] On October 30, 2014, Spoon appeared as the featured musical
guests during _The Daily Show_ 's Democalypse 2014: South By South Mess. [35]

On March 17, 2017 Spoon released their ninth studio album _Hot Thoughts_ on
Matador Records, their first on the label since their 1996 debut.

In April 2019, the band made the news via Democratic presidential nominee Pete
Buttigieg, who was filmed playing the band's song "The Way We Get By" on piano
before an event by his spokesperson, Lis Smith.[36] The band responded by
sharing the video on their Facebook and Twitter pages, remarking: "So this guy
can just do anyone's job, huh."[37]

In June 2019, the band announced the release of their greatest hits album,
_Everything Hits at Once: The Best of Spoon_. The album will compile the
band's best-known songs, as well as a new single entitled "No Bullets Spent".
The album is scheduled to be released on July 26, again via Matador.[38] On
July 9, Rob Pope announced he would be leaving the band.[39]

**Current**

**Current touring**

**Former**

**Timeline)**

