**SportsNet New York** ( **SNY** ) is an American regional sports network that
is owned by Sterling Entertainment Enterprises, LLC, itself a joint venture
between the New York Mets (which owns a controlling 65% interest) Sterling
Equities, Charter Communications through its acquisition of Time Warner Cable
in May 2016 (which owns 27%) and Comcast, through its NBC Sports Group
subsidiary (which owns 8%). The channel primarily broadcasts games and related
programming involving the Mets, but also carries supplementary coverage of the
Mets and the New York Jets as well as college sports events.

SNY maintained business operations and street-level studio facilities located
in the Time-Life Building at Rockefeller Center, on the corner of Avenue of
the Americas and West 51st Street in Manhattan (in the former home of the now-
defunct CNN news program _American Morning_ ) until March 2017, when they
relocated to 4 World Trade Center. SportsNet New York is available on cable
and fiber optic television providers throughout the New York metropolitan area
and New York state; it is also available nationwide on satellite via DirecTV.

SportsNet New York was launched on March 16, 2006. The network was created in
order for the New York Mets to better leverage the team's television
broadcasting rights, which were previously held by Cablevision for its
regional sports networks MSG and FSN New York. From 1998 to 2002, Cablevision
had a monopoly on the cable television rights to all local professional sports
franchises in the New York City market, which resulted in the company using
those rights for various business practices (some controversial among viewers
and local media analysts) such as moving certain games to its MSG Metro
Channels, a group of locally based services that had limited distribution on
most cable providers in the New York City metropolitan area.[ _citation
needed_ ] In 2002, YankeeNets – then the corporate entity which owned both the
New York Yankees and New Jersey Nets – ended the monopoly by launching the YES
Network to serve as the local cable broadcaster of their games, leaving the
Mets in the Cablevision fold until that team's contract with the company (the
dominant cable provider outside of Manhattan and the adjacent boroughs)
expired in 2005.

By 2011, through its majority ownership, the Mets received $68 million in
revenue from SportsNet New York for the broadcast rights to its games.[3] In
2013, Bloomberg estimated that $1.2 billion of the Mets' $2.1 billion value
came from SNY.[4]

SportsNet New York, through its majority ownership by the team, serves as the
primary local broadcaster of the New York Mets. It carries at least 120 games
involving the team each season not televised on a national network (Fox, TBS
or ESPN). SNY also produces a somewhat reduced schedule of games for local
broadcast on CW affiliate WPIX (channel 11), which are simulcast on other
stations within the team's broadcast territory. Gregg Picker serves as
producer for the games. Mets game telecasts and post-game shows on SNY delay
other programming, such as the 10:00 p.m. edition of _SportsNite_ , and
preempt all or portions of shows starting at midnight in the event a game with
a 7:00 p.m. start time runs over its scheduled time period.

In November 2005, the New York Jets signed a broadcasting agreement with
SportsNet New York to carry programs relating to the NFL franchise for three
years. SNY carries more than 250 hours of Jets-related content annually,
including both regular season and off-season shows with access to players,
coaches and management.

On October 1, 2014, SNY signed an agreement with the Fall Experimental
Football League to carry some of the league's inaugural regular season games
in October and November of that year.[5] On December 20, 2018, SNY and Rugby
United New York of Major League Rugby announced a partnership where SNY would
televise nine of the team's inaugural season games.[6]

On July 23, 2008, SNY reached an agreement with Rutgers University to become
"the exclusive home" of the university's athletics program; the deal includes
the rights to air encore presentations of the team's football telecasts
(involving games televised by ABC or any of the ESPN networks), weekly coaches
shows (for both football and basketball, such as _Inside Rutgers Football_ )
and press conferences.[7]

Beginning in 2008, SNY carried football and basketball games involving the Big
East Conference; the network lost the rights to Fox Sports 1 (through an
agreement with Fox Sports) when that network launched in August 2013. The
network also carried coaches shows focusing on the Seton Hall University and
St. John's University basketball teams, both members of the old Big
East.[8][9] From its launch, SNY also carried football and basketball games
from the Big Ten Conference that were not scheduled to be televised on a
national network; the network lost these games to the Big Ten Network when it
launched in 2010. SNY also televised college basketball games from the Sun
Belt Conference through ESPN Plus, later dropping these events in 2008, in
order to focus its college sports coverage on the Big East Conference.

In August 2010, the University of Connecticut announced a multi-year deal with
SportsNet New York to become "the official television home" of UConn Huskies
football and men's basketball. SNY will feature 300 hours of Huskies-related
programming annually, including 120 hours of game coverage.[10] In May 2012,
SNY signed a four-year agreement with the university to become the exclusive
broadcaster of the Huskies women's basketball team (assuming the regional
rights from Connecticut Public Television), agreeing to air a minimum of 17
games per year.[11] On October 31, 2013, SportsNet New York signed a
broadcasting agreement with the Atlantic 10 Conference to televise the
conference's college basketball games; under the initial deal, the network
carried 43 Atlantic 10 basketball games during the 2013–14 season.[12]

[13]

At its launch, it was originally expected that SNY would experience issues
with trying to gain carriage on Cablevision, as the Mets moved their game
telecasts from that company's two regional sports networks, MSG Network and
FSN New York (now MSG Plus). The situation was similar to that experienced by
the YES Network, the Yankees ended its broadcasting agreement with
Cablevision. Cablevision filed a lawsuit against Sterling Entertainment
Enterprises on the grounds that the franchise might have violated their
contract, which theoretically had one year left to run, as well as the right
of last refusal. However, a judge ruled in favor of Sterling Entertainment,
essentially stating that the Mets had voided their deal with Cablevision
entirely by paying a specified buyout fee, believed to have exceeded $50
million.

Comcast began carrying the network on its Hartford area systems on March 31,
2008. Then in July 2008, just days after the University of Connecticut signed
its broadcast deal with SNY, Cox Communications began carrying SportsNet New
York on channel 62 throughout its Connecticut service area. On August 29,
2011, the network launched a secondary feed for Connecticut, SNY-CT.[14]

SNY is also available on Comcast systems in Palm Beach County, Florida and
nationally on Verizon FiOS. However, due to broadcasting rules imposed by
Major League Baseball that restrict local telecasts to within their designated
broadcast territory, Mets games televised by the network are blacked out,
although pre-game and post-game shows and other non-event programming is
cleared for broadcast in Palm Beach County.

Beginning in 2017, SNY made Mets games available for live Internet streaming
to subscribers via its website and the NBC Sports app.[15]

