**Stephanie Cutter** (born October 22, 1968) is an American political
consultant. She served as Deputy Campaign Manager for President Barack Obama's
2012 re-election campaign,[1] and has previously worked in campaign and
communications roles for other Democrats including Ted Kennedy, John Kerry and
Michelle Obama.[2] _The New York Times_ described her as "a popular but
polarizing face of (Obama's) campaign", and a "soldier who says the things the
candidate can’t (or won’t) say."[3]

Cutter was born in Taunton, Massachusetts, and was raised in nearby Raynham,
Massachusetts.[4] She graduated from Bridgewater-Raynham Regional High School
in 1986.[5] Her mother, Grace, is a school teacher, and her brother served in
Afghanistan.[6] She received a B.A. degree from Smith College and a J.D.
degree from Georgetown Law School.[7][2]

In the 1990s, Cutter worked as a junior aide to Mario Cuomo[8] and also worked
for the Environmental Protection Agency.[9]

She worked for President Bill Clinton as Deputy Communications Director at the
White House during his administration[10] "to help restore Mr. Clinton’s image
in the aftermath of (his) impeachment and Monica Lewinsky",[3] and as
Associate Administrator for Communications at the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency.[11][12]

Beginning in 2001, she served as Communications Director for Senator Ted
Kennedy.[13]

In November 2003, she was named communications director for the John Kerry
campaign,[14] at Kennedy's recommendation.[9] During that campaign, she was
criticized for having a surly and difficult personality and was often
scapegoated for Kerry's loss.[9] Kerry considered the criticism of her unfair
and praised her work.[9][15] After the Kerry campaign, Cutter returned to work
for Kennedy.[8]

In June 2008 Cutter was appointed Chief of Staff to Michelle Obama for the
2008 Presidential general election campaign.[16][8] Stephanie Cutter and
Michelle Obama immediately clicked and Cutter is widely credited with building
Obama's popularity with the public,[17] particularly her Let's Move! health
initiative. She is credited with enlisting Republican Mike Huckabee to the
program, to help prevent criticism from conservatives.[9]

She served as the Chief Spokesperson for the Obama-Biden Transition
Project.[18][2] She served in the Treasury Department as Timothy Geithner's
counselor[19] where "she protected Geithner’s fragile reputation and tried to
spin unpopular policies like the Troubled Asset Relief Program and the A.I.G.
bailout."[3] In May 2009, Cutter was appointed to serve as adviser to
President Obama in the Supreme Court nominations.[20] Later that year, _GQ_
Magazine named Cutter one of the 50 most powerful people in Washington.[21]

In 2010, Cutter was named Assistant to the President for Special Projects,
charged with managing communications and outreach strategy for the Patient
Protection and Affordable Care Act.[22] In 2011, Cutter was named Deputy
Senior Advisor to President Barack Obama.[23][2]

In September 2011, the White House announced Cutter would leave her position
as Deputy Senior Advisor to serve as deputy campaign manager for Obama for
America.[24] She has appeared in numerous campaign videos and ads for Obama's
campaign, as well as a guest in TV appearances.[9] During the 2012 campaign,
Steve Schmidt, a Republican strategist, stated that Cutter is "arguably the
strongest player on either side out there now."[9]

CNN announced on June 26, 2013, that Cutter will join a new version of
_Crossfire_ re-launching[19] in the fall of 2013, with panelists Newt
Gingrich, S. E. Cupp, and Van Jones.[25]

Besides her role at CNN Cutter founded Precision Strategies, where she is a
partner.[26][10] Precision Strategies is a strategic consulting firm based in
Washington D.C. and New York City.[27] Cutter started the firm with three
veterans that worked for the Obama 2012 campaign team.[10]

Cutter informed CNN staffers on October 7, 2013 that she was pregnant with her
first child. With a due date of early March 2014, she informed the network she
would return to _Crossfire_ after maternity leave. She remained with the
series until it ended in July of that year.[28][29]

