**Steven Caple Jr.**[1] (born February 16, 1988) is an American film director,
producer, and screenwriter. His credits include _The Land_ (2016), _A
Different Tree_ , and _Prentice-N-Fury’s Ice Cream Adventure_. In 2017
_Forbes_ named Caple Jr. one of the 30 Under 30 in Hollywood &
Entertainment.[2]

Caple caught his first big break when his student film _A Different Tree_ won
HBO's Short Film Competition in 2013.[3]

Caple’s feature film debut _The Land_ premiered at the 2016 Sundance Film
Festival, where it was acquired by IFC Films. It tells the story of four
teenage boys who devote their summer to escaping the streets of Cleveland to
pursue a dream life of professional skateboarding. The film was released on
July 29, 2016. Caple would go on to be named by _The Playlist_ as one the 25
best breakthrough directors of 2016.[4]

Caple recently wrote HBO’s high-profile Emmett Till project, produced by Will
Smith, Casey Affleck and Jay-Z.[5] The six-episode miniseries is adapted from
Devery Anderson’s 2015 biography, _Emmett Till: The Murder That Shocked The
World And Propelled The Civil Rights Movement_.[6] It is based on the real
life story of 14-year-old black teen Emmett Till, who was brutally murdered
after allegedly flirting with a white woman in Mississippi in 1955.

Caple’s next film is the 2018 sports action drama film _Creed II_ , a sequel
to 2015 film _Creed_ and the eighth installment in the _Rocky_ film series.[7]
Michael B. Jordan and Sylvester Stallone are set to reprise their roles as
Adonis Creed and Rocky Balboa respectively, with Tessa Thompson also returning
as Bianca. Stallone said of appointing Caple as director: “I believe it’s
important for the director to also be a part of this generation like I was in
mine, to make the story as relatable as possible. We are extremely lucky to
have the talented young filmmaker Steven Caple Jr. step up and accept the role
of director. I am confident that he and Michael B. Jordan will hit it out of
the park!”[8] Production of _Creed II_ began in spring 2018. The film was
released on November 21, 2018 and received positive reviews.[9]

