**Steven Frederic Seagal** (/sɪˈɡɑːl/; born April 10, 1952) is an American
actor, producer, screenwriter, martial artist, and musician who holds
American, Serbian, and Russian citizenship.

Seagal was born in Lansing, Michigan. A 7th-dan black belt in aikido, he began
his adult life as a martial arts instructor in Japan,[1] becoming the first
foreigner to operate an aikido dojo in the country.[2] He later moved to Los
Angeles, California, where he had the same profession. In 1988, Seagal made
his acting debut in _Above the Law_. By 1991, he had starred in four
successful films. In 1992, he played Navy SEAL counter-terrorist expert Casey
Ryback in _Under Siege_. During the latter half of the 1990s, Seagal starred
in three more feature films and the direct-to-video film _The Patriot_.
Subsequently, his career shifted to mostly direct-to-video productions. He has
since appeared in films and reality shows, including _Steven Seagal: Lawman_ ,
which depicted Seagal performing his duties as a reserve deputy sheriff.

Seagal is a guitarist and has released two studio albums, _Songs from the
Crystal Cave_ and _Mojo Priest_ , and performed on the scores of several of
his films. He has worked with Stevie Wonder and Tony Rebel, who both performed
on his debut album. He has also been involved in a line of "therapeutic oil"
products and energy drinks. In addition, Seagal is a known
environmentalist,[3] animal rights activist, and supporter of 14th Dalai Lama
Tenzin Gyatso.[4][5] He is known for his outspoken political views and support
of Vladimir Putin, to whom he once referred as "one of the great living world
leaders".[6] He was granted Russian citizenship in 2016.[7] In 2018, he was
appointed Russia's special envoy to the U.S.[8]

From 1996 to 2018, multiple women accused Seagal of sexual harassment or
assault.[9][10]

Steven Frederic Seagal was born in Lansing, Michigan, on April 10, 1952,[11]
the son of medical technician Patricia (1930–2003) and high school mathematics
teacher Samuel Seagal (1928–1991).[12] His mother was of Dutch, English, and
German descent, while his father was the son of Russian Jews who had relocated
to the U.S.[13] He is also said to have Mongol heritage.[14] When he was five
years old, he moved with his parents to Fullerton, California. His mother
later told _People_ magazine that, prior to the move, Seagal was frail and
suffered from asthma: "He was a puny kid back then. But he really thrived
after the move [from Michigan]." Seagal attended Buena Park High School in
Buena Park, California, and Fullerton College between 1970 and 1971. As a
teen, he spent much time in his garage listening to loud rock music. However,
it was while working with a friendly old Japanese man at a dojo in Garden
Grove that he was encouraged to visit Japan.[15]

Seagal moved to Japan at some point between 1971 and 1973. By 1974 he had
returned to California. That year he met Miyako Fujitani, a second-degree
black belt and daughter of an Osaka aikido master who had come to Los Angeles
to teach aikido. When Miyako returned to Osaka, Seagal went with her. The
following year they married and had a son, Kentaro, and a daughter, Ayako. He
taught at the school owned by Miyako's family (though he is often stated to
have been the first non-Asian to open a dojo in Japan). As of 1990, Miyako and
her brother still taught there, and her mother was the chairwoman.[15]

Seagal initially returned to Taos, New Mexico, with his student (and later
film stuntman) Craig Dunn, where they opened a dojo, although Seagal spent
much of his time pursuing other ventures. After another period in Japan,
Seagal returned to the U.S. in 1983 with senior student Haruo Matsuoka. They
opened an aikido dojo, initially in North Hollywood, California, but later
moved it to the city of West Hollywood. Seagal left Matsuoka in charge of the
dojo, which the latter ran until the two parted ways in 1997.[16][17][18]

Seagal helped train Brazilian Mixed Martial Artist Lyoto Machida, who credited
Seagal for helping him perfect the front kick that he used to knock out Randy
Couture at _UFC 129_ in May 2011.[19][20]

In 1987, Seagal began work on his first film, _Above the Law_ (titled _Nico_
in Europe), with director Andrew Davis.[21] Following its success, Seagal's
subsequent movies were _Hard to Kill_ , _Marked for Death_ , and _Out for
Justice_ ; all were box office hits, making him an action hero. Later, he
achieved wider, mainstream success in 1992 with the release of _Under Siege_
(1992), which reunited Seagal with director Andrew Davis.

Seagal hosted the April 20, 1991 episode of the late night variety show
_Saturday Night Live_ , which aired as the 18th episode of the 16th season.
Cast member David Spade regarded Seagal as the show's worst host during
Spade's time there. Spade and co-star Tim Meadows cite Seagal's humorlessness,
his ill-treatment of the show's cast and writers, and his refusal to do a
"Hans and Franz" sketch because that skit's title characters stated that they
could beat up Seagal. Seagal was never invited back to the show following that
episode.[22][23] Meadows commented, "He didn't realize that you can't tell
somebody they're stupid on Wednesday and expect them to continue writing for
you on Saturday."[23] The cast and crew's difficulties with Seagal were later
echoed on-air by producer Lorne Michaels during guest host Nicolas Cage's
monologue in the September 26, 1992 Season 18 premiere. When Cage worried that
he would do so poorly that the audience would regard him as "the biggest jerk
who's ever been on the show", Michaels replied, "No, no. That would be Steven
Seagal."[24]

Seagal directed and starred in _On Deadly Ground_ (1994), featuring Michael
Caine, R. Lee Ermey, and Billy Bob Thornton in minor supporting roles. The
film emphasized environmental and spiritual themes, signaling a break with his
previous persona as a genre-ready inner-city cop. _On Deadly Ground_ was
poorly received by critics,[25] especially denouncing Seagal's long
environmental speech in the film. Regardless, Seagal considers it one of the
most important and relevant moments in his career. Seagal followed this with a
sequel to one of his most successful films, _Under Siege_ , titled _Under
Siege 2: Dark Territory_ (1995). In 1996, he had a role in the Kurt Russell
film _Executive Decision_ , portraying a special ops soldier who only appears
in the film's first 45 minutes. The same year, he filmed a police drama _The
Glimmer Man_ (1996). In another environmentally conscious and commercially
unsuccessful film, _Fire Down Below_ (1997), he played an EPA agent fighting
industrialists dumping toxic waste in the Kentucky hills.

In 1998, Seagal made _The Patriot_ , another environmental thriller which was
his first direct-to-video release in the United States (though it was released
theatrically in most of the world). Seagal produced this film with his own
money, and the film was shot on-location on and near his farm in Montana.

After producing _Prince of Central Park_ , Seagal returned to cinema screens
with the release of _Exit Wounds_ in March 2001. The film had fewer martial
arts scenes than Seagal's previous films, but it was a commercial success,
taking almost $80 million worldwide. However, he was unable to capitalize on
this success and his next two projects were both critical and commercial
failures. The movie _Ticker_ , co-starring Tom Sizemore and Dennis Hopper, was
filmed in San Francisco before _Exit Wounds_ , and went straight to DVD. _Half
Past Dead_ , starring hip hop star Ja Rule, made less than $20 million
worldwide.

Other than his role as a villain in Robert Rodriguez's _Machete_, all of the
films Seagal has made since the latter half of 2001 have been released direct-
to-video (DTV) in North America, with some theatrical releases to other
countries around the world. Seagal is credited as a producer and sometimes a
writer on many of these DTV movies, which include _Black Dawn_ , _Belly of the
Beast_ , _Out of Reach_ , _Submerged_ , _Kill Switch_ , _Urban Justice_ ,
_Pistol Whipped_ , _Against the Dark_ , _Driven to Kill_ , _A Dangerous Man_ ,
_Born to Raise Hell_ , and _The Keeper_.

In 2009, A&E Network premiered the reality television series _Steven Seagal:
Lawman_ , focusing on Seagal as a deputy in Louisiana. In 2011, he produced
and starred in a 13-episode television series entitled _True Justice_. It was
renewed for a second season on ReelzChannel in 2012.[26] In the UK, _True
Justice_ has been repackaged as a series of DVD "movies," with each disc
editing together two episodes.

Many of Seagal's films share unique elements which have become characteristic
of his body of work. His characters often have an elite past affiliation with
the CIA, Special Forces, or Black Ops (for example, Casey Ryback in _Under
Siege_ , a former Navy SEAL, Jack Cole in _The Glimmer Man_ , an ex-CIA police
detective, or Jonathan Cold in _The Foreigner_ and _Black Dawn_ , an ex-CIA
Black Ops freelancer.) His characters differ from those of other action movie
icons by virtue of their near-invulnerability; they almost never face any
significant physical threat, easily overpowering any opposition and never
facing bodily harm or even temporary defeat.[27] A notable exception is 2010's
_Machete_ , which features Seagal in a rare villainous role.[28]

Seagal's music appears in some of his films (for example, _Into The Sun_ and
_Ticker_ , where he appears as part of a bar band), as does his fluency in
other languages (he speaks Japanese in _Into the Sun_ ) and religion (Buddhism
features prominently in _The Glimmer Man_ and _Belly of the Beast_ ). His past
as an aikido teacher is also incorporated into several films, for example
_Above the Law_ (which opens with a montage of real-life photos from Seagal's
own past) or _Shadow Man_ , where he is seen giving an aikido demonstration.
Several of his films also feature prominent political messages, most notably
the environmentalism evident in _On Deadly Ground_ , which ends with a lengthy
speech in which Seagal (playing ex-CIA firefighter Forrest Taft) accuses big
business of rampant environmental degradation:

Big Business is primarily responsible for destroying the water we drink, the
air we breathe and the food we eat. They have no care for the world they
destroy, only for the money they make in the process... They basically control
the legislation, and, in fact, they control the Law... They influence the
media so that they can control our minds. They have made it a crime to speak
out for ourselves, and if we do so we're called "conspiracy nuts" and we're
laughed at... We have to force these companies to operate safely and
responsibly, and with all our best interests in mind.[ _citation needed_ ]

In 2008, author and critic Vern (no last name) published _Seagalogy_ , a work
which examines Seagal's filmography using the framework of auteur theory. The
book divides Seagal's filmography into different chronological "eras" with
distinct thematic elements. The book was updated in 2012 to include more
recent films and Seagal's work on the reality TV show _Steven Seagal:
Lawman_.[29]

In addition to acting and aikido, Seagal also plays the guitar. His songs have
been featured in several of his movies, including _Fire Down Below_ and
_Ticker_. Among his extensive collection are guitars previously owned by "the
Kings"; Albert, BB, and Freddie, as well as Bo Diddley, Stevie Ray Vaughan,
Buddy Guy, Howlin' Wolf, Muddy Waters, and Jimi Hendrix.[30]

In 2005, he released his first album, _Songs from the Crystal Cave_ , which
has a mix of pop, world, country, and blues music. It features duets with Tony
Rebel, Lt. Stichie, Lady Saw, and Stevie Wonder. The soundtrack to Seagal's
2005 film _Into the Sun_ features several songs from the album. One of his
album tracks, "Girl It's Alright", was also released as a single in several
countries alongside an accompanying music video. Seagal's second album, titled
_Mojo Priest_ , was released in April 2006. Subsequently, he spent the summer
of 2006 touring the United States and Europe with his band, Thunderbox, in
support of the album.

Seagal has been a Reserve Deputy Chief in the Jefferson Parish, Louisiana
Sheriff's Office. In the late 1980s, after teaching the deputies martial arts,
unarmed combat, and marksmanship, then-sheriff Harry Lee (1932–2007) was so
impressed that he asked Seagal to join the force. Seagal allegedly graduated
from a police academy in Los Angeles over twenty years ago and has a
certificate from Peace Officer Standards & Training (POST), an organization
that accredits California police officers. However, POST officials in
California and Louisiana have no record of Seagal being certified, and
Seagal's rank in Louisiana is therefore ceremonial.[31]

_Steven Seagal: Lawman_ , series which follows his work in the Jefferson
Parish Sheriff's Office, premiered on A&E on December 2, 2009. Seagal stated
that "I've decided to work with A&E on this series now because I believe it's
important to show the nation all the positive work being accomplished here in
Louisiana—to see the passion and commitment that comes from the Jefferson
Parish Sheriff's Office in this post-Katrina environment." The series premiere
drew 3.6 million viewers, ranking as best season opener for any original A&E
series ever.[32]

On April 14, 2010, the series was suspended by Jefferson Parish Sheriff Newell
Normand due to a sexual trafficking lawsuit filed against Seagal. The suit was
later dropped.[33] A&E resumed the show for the second season, which began on
October 6, 2010.

Production on Season 3 started in February 2011, with a change of location
from Louisiana to Maricopa County, Arizona.[34] Two episodes were scheduled to
be aired, beginning on January 4, 2012.[35] Shortly before the episodes were
to be aired, Season 3 was suspended, with no explanations given. Season 3
premiered on January 2, 2014, but the show was not renewed for a fourth
season.[36]

In 2005, Seagal Enterprises began to market an energy drink known as "Steven
Seagal's Lightning Bolt", but it has since been discontinued. Seagal has also
marketed an aftershave called "Scent of Action", and a range of knives and
weapons.[37][38]

In 2013, Seagal joined newly formed Russian firearms manufacturer ORSIS,
representing the company in both a promotional capacity[39] as well as
lobbying for the easement of US import restrictions on Russian sporting
firearms.[40] It was also announced he would work with the company to develop
a signature long-range rifle known provisionally as "ORSIS by Steven Seagal".

Seagal owns a dude ranch in Colorado, a home in the Mandeville Canyon section
of Los Angeles,[41][42] and a home in Louisiana.[43]

Seagal is a Buddhist. In February 1997, Lama Penor Rinpoche from Palyul
monastery announced that Seagal was a tulku, and specifically the
reincarnation of Chungdrag Dorje, a 17th-century terton (treasure revealer) of
the Nyingma, the oldest sect of Tibetan Buddhism.[44] Seagal's recognition
aroused controversy in the American Buddhist community, with Helen Tworkov
commenting in _Tricycle_ impugning the extent of Seagal's "spiritual wisdom"
and suggesting that Seagal bought his Buddhahood by donations to Penor's
Kunzang Palyul Choling center. Penor Rinpoche responded to the controversy by
saying that Seagal, although acting in violent movies, had not actually killed
people, and that Seagal was merely _recognized_ , whereas _enthronement_ as a
tulku would require first a "lengthy process of study and practice".[45]

Seagal holds citizenships in three countries: the United States, Serbia, and
Russia. Born in the US, he is an American citizen. He was granted Serbian
citizenship on January 11, 2016, following several visits to the country, and
has been asked to teach aikido to the Serbian Special Forces.[46]

Seagal was granted Russian citizenship on November 3, 2016; according to
government spokesman Dmitry Peskov, "He was asking quite insistently and over
a lengthy period to be granted citizenship."[47][7] While various media have
cited Seagal and President Vladimir Putin as friends and Seagal stated that he
"would like to consider [Putin] as a brother",[6] Putin has distanced himself
from Seagal; Peskov is reported to have said: "I wouldn't necessarily say he's
a huge fan, but he's definitely seen some of his movies."[48]

While in Japan, Seagal married his first wife, Miyako Fujitani, the daughter
of an aikido instructor. With Fujitani, he had a son, actor and model Kentaro
Seagal, and a daughter, writer and actress Ayako Fujitani. Seagal left Miyako
to move back to the United States.[49][50]

During this time, he met actress and model Kelly LeBrock, with whom he began
an affair that led to Fujitani granting him a divorce.[15] Seagal was briefly
married to actress Adrienne La Russa in 1984, but that marriage was annulled
the same year over concerns that his divorce had not yet been finalized.[51]
LeBrock gave birth to Seagal's daughter Annaliza in early 1987. Seagal and
LeBrock married in September 1987 and their son Dominic was born in June
1990.[15] Their daughter Arissa was born in 1993.[52] The following year,
LeBrock filed for divorce citing "irreconcilable differences".[51][52]

Seagal is married to Mongolian Erdenetuya Batsukh (Mongolian: Батсүхийн
Эрдэнэтуяа), better known as "Elle".[53] They have one son together, Kunzang.[
_citation needed_ ] From an early age, Elle trained as a dancer at the
Children's Palace in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia. After her graduation from high
school and the Children's Palace, she pursued a career as a professional
dancer. She won a number of dancing contests and was considered the top female
dancer in Mongolia, excelling at ballroom dancing in particular. Elle first
met Seagal in 2001, when she worked as his interpreter during his visit to
Mongolia.

Seagal has seven children from four relationships, and two grandchildren by
his eldest son, Kentaro.[54] In addition to his biological offspring, Seagal
is the guardian of Yabshi Pan Rinzinwangmo,[55] the only child of the 10th
Panchen Lama of Tibet. When she studied in the United States, Seagal was her
minder and bodyguard.[56]

In May 1991 (during the filming of _Out for Justice_ ), Warner Bros. employees
Raenne Malone, Nicole Selinger, and Christine Keeve accused Seagal of sexual
harassment.[57] In return for remaining silent, Malone and another woman
received around $50,000 each in an out-of-court settlement.[57][58] Around the
same time, at least four actresses claimed that Seagal had made sexual
advances, typically during late-night "casting sessions".[59]

In another incident, Jenny McCarthy claimed that Seagal asked her to undress
during an audition for _Under Siege 2_.[60]

In 1995, Seagal was charged with employment discrimination, sexual harassment,
and breach of contract.[61] Cheryl Shuman filed a case against Seagal,
accusing him of threatening and beating her during the filming of _On Deadly
Ground_.[61] In August 1995, Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Hiroshi Fujisaki
dismissed the case, calling the claims "repetitive and unintelligible".[61]

On April 12, 2010, 23-year-old Kayden Nguyen filed a lawsuit against Seagal in
a Los Angeles County Superior Court, requesting more than one million dollars
in damages.[62][63][64] In her suit, Nguyen alleged Seagal engaged in sexual
harassment, the illegal trafficking of females for sex, failure to prevent
sexual harassment, and wrongful termination.[62][63] Seagal denied the
allegations, but his reality show _Steven Seagal: Lawman_ was suspended while
his attorneys resolved the case.[63] On July 14, 2010, three months after
Nguyen filed her suit, she withdrew her claim without explanation.[65][66]

On August 30, 2011, Jesus Sanchez Llovera filed a lawsuit against Seagal over
his part in a Maricopa county police raid with heavy weapons (notably
including an army surplus tank) of Llovera's residence for suspicion of
cockfighting. The incident was taped for Seagal's A&E reality show, _Steven
Seagal: Lawman_. Llovera was seeking $100,000 for damages caused during the
raid, and a letter of apology from Seagal to Llovera's children for the death
of their family pet. Llovera claimed that his 11-month-old puppy was shot and
killed during the raid.[67] Llovera failed to file court-ordered paperwork
after his attorney withdrew from the case and the lawsuit was dismissed in
January 2013.[68]

In 2017, actress Portia de Rossi accused Seagal of sexually harassing her
during a movie audition. De Rossi alleged that during an audition in Seagal's
office, he told her "how important it was to have chemistry off-screen" before
unzipping his pants.[69][70] On November 9, 2017, Dutch model Faviola Dadis
posted a statement on her Instagram account stating that she also had been
sexually assaulted by Seagal years earlier.[71]

On January 15, 2018, actress Rachel Grant publicly accused Seagal of sexually
assaulting her in 2002, during pre-production on his direct-to-video film,
_Out for a Kill_ (2003), stating that she lost her job on the film after the
incident.[72][73] In February 2018, the Los Angeles County District Attorney's
office acknowledged that it was reviewing a potential sex abuse case involving
Seagal.[74] In March 2018, Regina Simons publicly claimed that in 1993, when
she was 18, Seagal raped her at his home when she arrived for what she thought
was a wrap party for the movie _On Deadly Ground._[75]

Seagal lent his voice as a narrator for an activist film project, _Medicine
Lake Video_. The project seeks to protect sacred tribal ground near Seagal's
ranch in Siskiyou County.[76] He also wrote an open letter to the leadership
of Thailand in 2003, urging them to enact a law to prevent the torture of baby
elephants.[77]

In 1999, Seagal was awarded a PETA Humanitarian Award.[78][79][80]

In a March 2014 interview with _Rossiyskaya Gazeta_ , Seagal described
Vladimir Putin as "one of the great living world leaders". He expressed
support for the annexation of Crimea by Russia.[6] In July 2014, following
calls for a boycott, Seagal was dropped from the lineup of the August Blues
Festival in Haapsalu, Estonia.[81][82] Estonian musician Tõnis Mägi, the
minister of Foreign Affairs, Urmas Paet, and Parliament's Foreign Affairs
chairman Marko Mihkelson, had all condemned inviting Seagal into the
country,[82] with Paet stating, "Steven Seagal has tried to actively
participate in politics during the past few months and has done it in a way
which is unacceptable to the majority of the world that respects democracy and
the rule of law."[83] In August 2014, Seagal appeared at a Night Wolves-
organized show in Sevastopol, Crimea, supporting the Crimean annexation and
depicting Ukraine as a country controlled by fascists.[84][85] On November 3,
Seagal was granted Russian citizenship by president Putin.[86] His views on
Ukraine and Russian citizenship caused Ukraine to ban him because he
"committed socially dangerous actions".[87]

Seagal spoke out against the protests during the United States national anthem
by professional athletes, stating, "I believe in free speech, I believe that
everyone's entitled to their own opinion, but I don't agree that they should
hold the United States of America or the world hostage by taking a venue where
people are tuning in to watch a football game and imposing their political
views." He also expressed skepticism of alleged Russian interference in the
2016 United States elections.[88]

Seagal has extensive sword collection, and once had a custom gun made for him
once a month.[89]

