The **structural history of the Roman military** concerns the major
transformations in the organization and constitution of ancient Rome's armed
forces, "the most effective and long-lived military institution known to
history."[1] From its origins around 800 BC to its final dissolution in AD 476
with the demise of the Western Roman Empire, Rome's military organization
underwent substantial structural change. At the highest level of structure,
the forces were split into the Roman army and the Roman navy, although these
two branches were less distinct than in many modern national defense forces.
Within the top levels of both army and navy, structural changes occurred as a
result of both positive military reform and organic structural evolution.
These changes can be divided into four distinct phases.

According to the historians Livy and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, writing at a
far later date, the earliest Roman army existed in the 8th century BC. During
this period Rome itself was probably little more than a fortified hilltop
settlement and its army a relatively small force, whose activities were
limited "mainly [to] raiding and cattle rustling with the occasional skirmish-
like battle".[2] Historian Theodor Mommsen referred to it as Rome's _curiate_
army, named for its presumed subdivision along the boundaries of Rome's three
founding tribes (Latin: _curiae_ ), the Ramnians, Tities and Luceres.[3] This
army's exact structure is not known, but it is probable that it loosely
resembled a warrior band or group of bodyguards led by a chieftain or king.[4]
Mommsen believes that Roman military organization of this period was
regimented by the "Laws of [the apocryphal] King [V]Italus"[5] but these laws,
though referred to by Aristotle, have been lost.

The army (Latin: _legio_ ) consisted, according to Livy, of exactly 3,000
infantry and 300 horsemen, one third from each of Rome's three founding
tribes. **[Note 1]**[6] Warriors served under six "leaders of division"
(Latin: _tribuni_ ) who in turn served under a general, usually in the person
of the reigning King. Mommsen uses philological arguments and references from
Livy and others to suggest that the greater mass of foot-soldiers probably
consisted of _pilumni_ (javelin-throwers), with a smaller number possibly
serving as _arquites_ (archers).[7] The cavalry was far smaller in number and
probably consisted solely of the town's richest citizens.[8] The army may also
have contained the earliest form of chariots,[9] hinted at by references to
the _flexuntes_ ("the wheelers").[10]

By the beginning of the 7th century BC, the Iron-Age Etruscan civilization
(Latin: _Etrusci_ ) was dominant in the region.[11] Like most of the other
peoples in the region, the Romans warred against the Etruscans. By the close
of the century, the Romans had lost their struggle for independence, and the
Etruscans had conquered Rome, establishing a military dictatorship, or
kingdom, in the city.

Although several Roman sources including Livy and Polybius talk extensively
about the Roman army of the Roman Kingdom period that followed the Etruscan
capture of the city, no contemporary accounts survive. Polybius, for example,
was writing some 300 years after the events in question, and Livy some 500
years later. Additionally, what records were kept by the Romans at this time
were later destroyed when the city was sacked. The sources for this period
cannot therefore be seen as reliable, as they can be for later military
history, e.g. from the First Punic War onwards.

According to our surviving narratives, the three kings of Rome during the
Etruscan occupation were Tarquinius Priscus, Servius Tullius, and Tarquinius
Superbus. During this period the army underwent a reformation into a
_centurial_ army based on socio-economic class.[12] This reformation is
traditionally attributed to Servius Tullius, the second of the Etruscan kings.
Tullius had earlier carried out the first Roman census of all citizens.[13]
Livy tells us that Tullius reformed the army by transplanting onto it the
structure derived originally for civil life as a result of this census.[12] At
all levels, military service was, at this time, considered to be a civic
responsibility and a way of advancing one's status within society.[14]

However, Rome's social classes were qualified rather than created by the
census. It is perhaps more accurate to say therefore that the army's structure
was slightly refined during this period rather than radically reformed. Prior
to these reforms, the infantry was divided into the _classis_ of rich citizens
and the _infra classem_ of poorer citizens. The latter were excluded from the
regular line of battle on the basis that their equipment was of poor
quality.[8] During the reforms, this crude division of poorer and richer
citizens was further stratified. The army thereafter consisted of a number of
troop types based upon the social class of propertied citizens, collectively
known as _adsidui_. From the poorest in the "fifth class" to the richest in
the "first class" and the equestrians above them, military service was
compulsory for all.[15] However, Roman citizens at this time generally viewed
military service as a proper undertaking of duty to the state, in contrast to
later views of military service as an unwelcome and unpleasant burden.[16]
Whereas there are accounts of Romans in the late empire mutilating their own
bodies in order to exempt themselves from military service,[17] there seems to
have been no such reluctance to serve in the military of early Rome. This may
in part be due to the generally lower intensity of conflict in this era; to
the fact that men were fighting close to and often in protection of their own
homes, or due to—as posited by later Roman writers—a greater martial spirit in
antiquity. **[Note 2]**[18]

The equestrians, the highest social class of all, served in mounted units
known as _equites_. The first class of the richest citizens served as heavy
infantry with swords and long spears (resembling hoplites), and provided the
first line of the battle formation. The second class were armed similarly to
the first class, but without a breastplate for protection, and with an oblong
rather than a round shield. The second class stood immediately behind the
first class when the army was drawn up in battle formation. The third and
fourth classes were more lightly armed and carried a thrusting-spear and
javelins. The third class stood behind the second class in battle formation,
normally providing javelin support. The poorest of the propertied men of the
city comprised the fifth class. They were generally too poor to afford much
equipment at all and were armed as skirmishers with slings and stones. They
were deployed in a screen in front of the main army, covering its approach and
masking its manoeuvres.

Men without property, who were thereby excluded from the qualifying social
classes of the _adsidui_ , were exempted from military service on the grounds
that they were too poor to provide themselves with any arms whatsoever.[12]
However, in the most pressing circumstances, even these _proletarii_ were
pressed into service,[19] though their military worth was probably
questionable. Troops in all of these classes would fight together on the
battlefield, with the exception of the most senior troops, who were expected
to guard the city.[13]

The army is said to have increased from 3,000 to 4,000 men in the 5th century
BC, and then again from 4,000 to 6,000 men sometime before 400 BC.[8] This
later army of 6,000 men were then divided into 60 _centuries_ of 100 men
each.[20]

The army of the early Republic continued to evolve, and although there was a
tendency among Romans to attribute such changes to great reformers, it is more
likely that changes were the product of slow evolution rather than singular
and deliberate policy of reform.[21] The manipular formation was probably
copied from Rome's Samnite enemies to the south, perhaps as a result of Roman
defeats in the Second Samnite War.[22][23]

During this period, a military formation of around 5,000 men was known as a
legion (Latin: _legio_ ). However, in contrast to later legionary formations
of exclusively heavy infantry, the legions of the early and middle Republic
consisted of both light and heavy infantry. The term _manipular legion_ , a
legion based on units called maniples, is therefore used to contrast the later
_cohortal_ legion of the Empire that was based around a system of _cohort_
units. The manipular legion was based partially upon social class and
partially upon age and military experience.[24] It therefore represents a
theoretical compromise between the earlier class-based army and the class-free
armies of later years. In practice, even slaves were at one time pressed into
the army of the Republic out of necessity.[25] Normally a single legion was
raised each year, but in 366 BC two legions were raised in a single year for
the first time.[8]

_Maniples_ were units of 120 men each drawn from a single infantry class. The
maniples were small enough to permit tactical movement of individual infantry
units on the battlefield within the framework of the greater army. The
maniples were typically deployed into three discrete lines (Latin: _triplex
acies_ ) based on the three heavy infantry types of _hastati_ , _principes_
and _triarii_.[26] The first type, the _hastati_ , typically formed the first
rank in battle formation. They typically wore a brass chest plate (though some
could afford mail), a helmet called a galea, and occasionally, greaves (shin
guards). They carried an iron bossed wooden shield, 120 cm (4 ft) tall and
rectangular in shape with a curved front to partially protect the sides.
Traditionally they were armed with a sword known as a _gladius_ and two
throwing spears known as _pila_ : one the heavy _pilum_ of popular imagination
and one a slender javelin.[27] However the exact introduction of the Gladius
and the replacement of the spear with the sword as the primary weapon of the
Roman Legions is uncertain, and it's possible that the early manipular legions
still fought with the Hastati and Principes wielding the Hasta or Spear.

The second type, the _principes_ , typically formed the second rank of
soldiers back from the front of a battle line. They were heavy infantry
soldiers armed and armoured as per the hastati. The _triarii_ , who typically
formed the third rank when the army was arrayed for battle, were the last
remnant of hoplite-style troops in the Roman army. They were armed and
armoured as per the _principes_ , with the exception that they carried a pike
rather than two _pila_.[27] A 600-man triarii maniple was divided into two
formations each six men across by 10 men deep.[28] A manipular legion
typically contained between 1,200-2400 _hastati_ , 1,200-2400 _principes_ and
600-1200 _triarii_.[29] The three classes of unit may have retained some
slight parallel to social divisions within Roman society, but at least
officially the three lines were based upon age and experience rather than
social class. Young, unproven men would serve as _hastati_ , older men with
some military experience as _principes_ , and veteran troops of advanced age
and experience as _triarii_.

The heavy infantry of the maniples were supported by a number of light
infantry (Latin: _velites_ ) and cavalry (Latin: _equites_ ) troops, typically
300 horsemen per manipular legion.[26] The cavalry was drawn primarily from
the richest class of equestrians, but additional cavalry and light infantry
were drawn at times from the socii and Latini of the Italian mainland. The
_equites_ were still drawn from the wealthier classes in Roman society. There
was an additional class of troops (Latin: _accensi_ , also _adscripticii_ and
later _supernumerarii_ ) who followed the army without specific martial roles
and were deployed to the rear of the _triarii_. Their role in accompanying the
army was primarily to supply any vacancies that might occur in the maniples,
but they also seem to have acted occasionally as orderlies to the officers.

The light infantry of 1,200 _velites_[26] consisted of unarmoured skirmishing
troops drawn from the youngest and lower social classes. They were armed with
a sword and shield (90 cm (3 ft) diameter), as well as several light javelins,
each with a 90 cm (3 ft) wooden shaft the diameter of a finger, with a c. 25
cm (10 in) narrow metal point.[27] Their numbers were swollen by the addition
of allied light infantry and irregular _rorarii_.

The Roman levy of 403 BC was the first to be requested to campaign for longer
than a single season,[30] and from this point on such a practice became
gradually more common, if still not typical.

A small navy had operated at a fairly low level after the Second Samnite War,
but it was massively upgraded during this period, expanding from a few
primarily river- and coastal-based patrol craft to a full maritime unit. After
a period of frenetic construction, the navy mushroomed to a size of more than
400 ships on the Carthaginian pattern. Once completed, it could accommodate up
to 100,000 sailors and embarked troops for battle. The navy thereafter
declined in size. This was partially because a pacified Roman Mediterranean
called for little naval policing, and partially because the Romans chose to
rely during this period on ships provided by Greek cities, whose peoples had
greater maritime experience.[31]

The extraordinary demands of the Punic Wars, in addition to a shortage of
manpower, exposed the tactical weaknesses of the manipular legion, at least in
the short term.[32] In 217 BC, Rome was forced to effectively ignore its long-
standing principle that its soldiers must be both citizens and property owners
when slaves were pressed into naval service;[25] around 213 BC, the property
requirement was reduced from 11,000 to 4,000 asses.[25] Since the Romans are
unlikely to have preferred to employ slaves over poor citizens in their
armies,[19] it must be assumed that, at this point, the _proletarii_ of the
poorest citizens must also have been pressed into service despite their lack
of legal qualification. By 123 BC, the financial requirement for military
service was slashed again from 4,000 asses to just 1,500 asses.[33] By this
time, therefore, it is clear that many of the property-less former
_proletarii_ had been nominally admitted into the _adsidui_.[33]

During the 2nd century BC, Roman territory saw an overall decline in
population,[34] partially due to the huge losses incurred during various wars.
This was accompanied by severe social stresses and the greater collapse of the
middle classes into lower classes of the census and the _proletarii_.[34] As a
result, both the Roman society and its military became increasingly
proletarianised. The Roman state was forced to arm its soldiers at the expense
of the state, since many of the soldiers who made up its lower classes were
now impoverished _proletarii_ in all but name, and were too poor to afford
their own equipment.[34]

The distinction between the heavy infantry types of _hastati_ , _principes_
and _triarii_ began to blur, perhaps because the state was now assuming the
responsibility of providing standard-issue equipment to all but the first
class of troops, who alone were able to afford their own equipment.[34] By the
time of Polybius, the _triarii_ or their successors still represented a
distinct heavy infantry type armed with a unique style of cuirass, but the
_hastati_ and _principes_ had become indistinguishable.[34]

In addition, the shortage of available manpower led to a greater burden being
placed upon its allies ( _socii_ ) for the provision of allied troops.[35]
Where accepted allies could not provide the required force types, the Romans
were not averse during this period to hiring mercenaries to fight alongside
the legions.[36]

In a process known as the Marian reforms, Roman consul Gaius Marius carried
out a programme of reform of the Roman military.[25] In 107 BC, all citizens,
regardless of their wealth or social class, were made eligible for entry into
the Roman army.[37] This move formalised and concluded a gradual process that
had been growing for centuries, of removing property requirements for military
service.[38] The distinction between _hastati_ , _principes_ and _triarii_ ,
which had already become blurred, was officially removed,[26][39] and the
legionary infantry of popular imagination was created. Legionary infantry
formed a homogeneous force of heavy infantry. These legionaries were drawn
from citizen stock; by this time, Roman or Latin citizenship had been
regionally expanded over much of ancient Italy and Cisalpine Gaul.[40] Lighter
citizen infantry, such as the _velites_ and _equites_ , were replaced by non-
citizen _auxilia_ that could consist of foreign mercenaries.[41] Due to the
concentration of the citizen legions into a force of heavy infantry[29] Rome's
armies depended on auxiliary cavalry attachments for support. As a tactical
necessity, legions were almost always accompanied by an equal or greater
number of lighter auxiliary troops,[42] which were drawn from the non-citizens
of the Empire's territories. One known exception of legions being formed from
non-citizen provinces during this period was the legion that was raised in the
province of Galatia.[40]

After Marius, the legions were drawn largely from volunteer citizens rather
than citizens conscripted for duty.[43] Volunteers came forward and were
accepted not from citizens of the city of Rome itself but from the surrounding
countryside and smaller towns falling under Roman control.[44] Whereas some
long-term military professionals were classed as veterans, they were
outnumbered by civilians with limited military experience who were in active
service perhaps only for a few campaigns.[45] The legions of the late Republic
remained, unlike the legions of the later Empire, predominantly Roman in
origin, although some small number of ex-auxiliary troops were probably
incorporated.[46] The army's higher-level officers and commanders were still
drawn exclusively from the Roman aristocracy.[44]

Unlike earlier in the Republic, legionaries were no longer fighting on a
seasonal basis to protect their land. **[Note 3]** Instead, they received
standard pay, and were employed by the state on a fixed-term basis. As a
consequence, military duty began to appeal most to the poorest sections of
society, to whom a guaranteed salary was attractive.[47] The army therefore
consisted of a far higher proportion of the poor—particularly the rural
poor—than it had previously.[48] A destabilising consequence of this
development was that the proletariat "acquired a stronger and more elevated
position"[47] within the state. This professionalisation of the military was
necessary to provide permanent garrisons for newly acquired and distant
territories such as Hispania, something not possible under an army of seasonal
citizen militia.

Historian R. E. Smith notes that there was a need to raise additional legions
in an emergency to repel specific strategic threats. He argues that this may
have resulted in two types of legion.[49] Long-standing legions deployed
overseas were probably professional troops forming a standing army. Quickly-
formed new legions, in contrast, consisted of younger men, perhaps with little
or no military experience, who hoped for adventure and plunder.[49] However,
no distinction in basic pay, discipline or armour is known of between the two
types of legion. The practice of veteran troops signing up again voluntarily
into newly raised legions must have meant that no one army conformed exactly
to one or other of these theoretical archetypes.

The legions of the late Republic were, structurally, almost entirely heavy
infantry. The legion's main sub-unit was called a _cohort_ and consisted of
approximately 480 infantrymen.[50] The cohort was therefore a much larger unit
than the earlier _maniple_ sub-unit, and was divided into six centuriae of 80
men each.[50] Each centuria was separated further into 10 "tent groups"
(Latin: _contubernia_ ) of 8 men each. Legions additionally consisted of a
small body, typically 120 men, of Roman legionary cavalry (Latin: _equites
legionis_ ). The _equites_ were used as scouts and dispatch riders rather than
battlefield cavalry.[51] Legions also contained a dedicated artillery crew of
perhaps 60 men, who would operate devices such as _ballistae_.[50]

Each legion was normally partnered with an approximately equal number of
allied (non-Roman) _auxiliae_ troops.[52] The addition of allied troops to the
Roman army was a formalisation of the earlier arrangement of using light
troops from the Socii and Latini, who had received Roman citizenship after the
Social War.[53] Auxiliary troops could be formed from either auxiliary light
cavalry known as _alae_ , auxiliary light infantry known as _cohors auxiliae_
, or a flexible mixture of the two known as _cohors equitata_.[52] Cavalry
types included mounted archers (Latin: _sagittarii_ ) and heavy shock cavalry
(Latin: _cataphracti_ or _clibanarii_ ). Infantry could be armed with bows,
slings, throwing spears, long swords, or thrusting spears. Auxiliary units
were originally led by their own chiefs, and, in this period, their internal
organisation was left to their commanders.[54]

However, "the most obvious deficiency" of the Roman army remained its shortage
of cavalry, especially heavy cavalry;[55] even auxiliary troops were
predominantly infantry. Luttwak argues that auxiliary forces largely consisted
of Cretan archers, Balearic slingers and Numidian infantry, all of whom fought
on foot.[56] As Rome's borders expanded and its adversaries changed from
largely infantry-based to largely cavalry-based troops, the infantry-based
Roman army began to find itself at a tactical disadvantage, particularly in
the East.

After having declined in size following the subjugation of the Mediterranean,
the Roman navy underwent short-term upgrading and revitalisation in the late
Republic to meet several new demands. Under Caesar, an invasion fleet was
assembled in the English Channel to allow the invasion of Britain; under
Pompey, a large fleet was raised in the Mediterranean Sea to clear the sea of
Cilician pirates.[31] During the civil war that followed, as many as a
thousand ships were either constructed or pressed into service from Greek
cities.[31]

By the time of Julius Caesar in 54 BC, regular legionary units were
supplemented by _exploratores_ , a body of scouts, and _speculatores_ , spies
who infiltrated enemy camps.[57] Due to the demands of the civil war, the
extraordinary measure of recruiting legions from non-citizens was taken by
Caesar in Transalpine Gaul (Latin: _Gallia Transalpina_ ), by Brutus in
Macedonia, and by Pompey in Pharsalus.[58] This irregular and extraordinary
recruitment was not, however, typical of recruitment during this period, and
Roman law still officially required that legions were recruited from Roman
citizens only.

By the turn of the millennium, Emperor Augustus' primary military concern was
to prevent Roman generals from further usurping the imperial throne.[59] The
experience of Caesar and, earlier, Marius and Sulla, had demonstrated the
willingness of "emergency" (re-activated previously decommissioned) legions
containing troops keen for plunder to follow their generals against the state.
Augustus therefore removed the need for such emergency armies by increasing
the size of the standing armies to a size sufficient to provide territorial
defence on their own.[60] Perhaps due to similar concerns, the legions and
auxiliaries of the army were supplemented under the Emperor Augustus by an
elite formation of guards dedicated to the protection of the Emperor. The
first such unit was based in Rome and were known as the Praetorian Guard, and
a second similar formation were known as the Cohortes urbanae.[61]

The legions, which had been a mix of life professionals and civilian
campaigners, was altered into a standing army of professionals only.[62] The
actual structure of the cohort army remained much the same as in the late
Republic, although around the 1st century AD the first cohort of each legion
was increased in size to a total of 800 soldiers.[63] However, while the
structure of the legions remained much the same, their make-up gradually
changed. Whereas early Republican legions had been raised by a draft from
eligible Roman citizens, imperial legions were recruited solely on a voluntary
basis and from a much wider base of manpower. Likewise, whereas Republican
legions had been recruited almost exclusively in Italy, early Imperial legions
drew most of their recruits from Roman colonies in the provinces from 68 AD
onwards. One estimate places the proportion of Italian troops at 65% under
Augustus in c. 1 AD, falling to around 49% by the end of Nero's reign.[64]

Since the legions were officially open only to Roman citizens, Max Cary and
Howard Hayes Scullard argue that at least in some provinces at this time "many
provincials must have been recruited who lacked any genuine claim to Roman
citizenship but received it unofficially on enlistment,"[65] a practice that
was to increase in the 2nd century.[66] This is most likely in those provinces
where the pool of Roman citizens was not large enough to fulfill the
provincial army's recruitment needs. One possible example is Britain, where
one estimate puts the citizen pool in the 1st century at only 50,000 out of a
total provincial population of around two million.[67]

At the same time as the legions underwent these transformations, the _auxilia_
were reorganized and a number of allied troops were formalised into standing
units similar to legions. Rather than being raised re-actively when required,
the process of raising auxiliary troops was carried out in advance of
conflicts according to annual targets.[68] Whereas the internal organisation
of the _auxilia_ had previously been left up to their commanders, in the early
empire they were organised into standardised units known as _turmae_ (for
cavalry _alae_ ) and _centuriae_ (for infantry _cohortes_ ).[54] Although
never becoming as standardised in their equipment as the legions,[69] and
often retaining some national flavour, the size of the units at least was
standardised to some degree. Cavalry were formed into either an _ala
quingenaria_ of 512 horsemen, or an _ala millaria_ of 1,000 horsemen.[52]
Likewise, infantry auxilia could be formed into a _cohors quingenaria_ of 500
men or a _cohors millaria_ of 1,000 men.[52] Mixed cavalry/infantry
auxiliaries were typically formed with a larger proportion of foot than horse
troops: the _cohors equitata quingenaria_ consisted of 380 foot and 120
horsemen, and the _cohors equitata millaria_ consisted of 760 foot and 240
horsemen.[52]

The vitality of the empire at this point was such that the use of native
_auxilia_ in the Roman army did not apparently barbarise the military as some
scholars claim was to happen in the late empire.[70] On the contrary, those
serving in the _auxilia_ during this period frequently strove to Romanise
themselves. They were granted Roman citizenship on retirement, granting them
several social advantages, and their sons became eligible for service in the
legions.[71]

As with the army, many non-Italians were recruited into the Roman Navy, partly
because the Romans had never readily taken to the sea. It appears that the
navy was considered to be slightly less prestigious than the _auxilia_ but,
like the _auxilia_ , troops could gain citizenship on discharge upon
retirement. In terms of structure, each ship was staffed by a group of men
approximately equivalent to a century, with ten ships forming a naval
squadron.[72]

Through the final years of the 1st century AD, the legions remained the
backbone of the Roman army, although the _auxilia_ in fact outnumbered them by
up to half as much again.[73] Within the legions, the proportion of troops
recruited from within Italy fell gradually after 70 AD.[74] By the close of
the 1st century, this proportion had fallen to as low as 22 percent, with the
remainder drawn from conquered provinces.[64] Since technically only citizens
were allowed to enlist in the legions, where recruits did not possess
citizenship then, at least in some instances, citizenship "was simply given
[to] them on enlistment".[75] During this time, the borders of the Empire had
remained relatively fixed to the extent originally reached under the Emperor
Trajan. Because of this, the army was increasingly responsible for protecting
existing frontiers rather than expanding into foreign territory, the latter of
which had characterised the army's earlier existence.[76] As a result, legions
became stationed in largely fixed locations. Although entire legions were
occasionally transferred into theatres of war, they remained largely rooted in
one or more legionary bases in a province, detaching into smaller bodies of
troops (Latin: _vexillationes_ ) on demand.[77] This policy eventually led to
a split of the military's land-based forces into mobile and fixed troops in
the later Empire. In general, the best troops were dispatched as
_vexillationes_ , and the remainder left to guard border defences were of
lower quality, perhaps those with injuries or near retirement.[78]

By the time of the emperor Hadrian the proportion of Italians in the legions
had fallen to just ten percent[64] and provincial citizens now dominated. This
low figure is probably a direct result of the changing needs of military
staffing: a system of fixed border defences (Latin: _limes_ ) were established
around the Empire's periphery under Hadrian, consolidating Trajan's
territorial gains. These called for troops to be stationed permanently in the
provinces, a prospect more attractive to locally raised rather than Italian
troops.[64] The higher prestige and pay to be found in the Italian dominated
Praetorian Guard must also have played a role. The majority of the troops in
the legions at the start of the 3rd century AD were from the more Romanised
(though non-Italian) provinces, especially Illyria.[79] As the century
progressed, more and more barbarians (Latin: _barbari_ ) were permitted to
settle inside of, and tasked with aiding in the defence of, Rome's
borders.[80] As a result, greater numbers of barbarous and semi-barbarous
peoples were gradually admitted to the army.[79]

However, whether this regionalisation of the legions was partnered by a drop
in the professionalism of the troops is contested. Antonio Santosuosso argues
that the strict discipline and high motivation of the days of Marius had
lapsed,[81] but Andrew Alfoldi states that the Illyrian troops were both
valiant and warlike,[79] and Tacitus described German recruits as being
natural mercenaries (Latin: _vivi ad arma nati_ ).[82] It seems that
discipline in the legions did slacken, with soldiers granted permission to
live with wives outside of military lodgings and permitted to adopt a more
lavish and comfortable lifestyle, in contrast to the strict military regimen
of earlier years.[81] However, it is by no means certain that this led to any
reduction in the effectiveness of the legions, due to the greater ferocity and
stature of the _barbari_ recruits. The flavour of the Roman military, however,
was now dictated by the increasing number of regional recruits, leading to a
partial barbarisation of Rome's military forces beginning in this period.[83]
The barbarisation of the lower ranks was paralleled by a concurrent
barbarisation of its command structure, with the Roman senators who had
traditionally provided its commanders becoming entirely excluded from the
army. By 235 AD the Emperor himself, the figurehead of the entire military,
was a man born outside of Italy to non-Italian parents.[84]

The gradual inclusion of greater numbers of non-citizen troops into the
military was taken a further step by the creation under Hadrian of a new type
of force in addition to the legions and _auxilia_ , known as _numeri_.[76]
Formed in bodies of around 300 irregular troops,[52] the _numeri_ were drawn
from subjugate provinces and peoples of client-states or even from beyond the
borders of the empire. They were both less regimented and less Romanised than
auxiliary troops, with a "pronounced national character,"[85] including native
dress and native war cries.[70] The introduction of the _numeri_ was a
response to the need for cheap troops, who were nevertheless fierce and
provided a force balance of light infantry and cavalry.[86] They were
therefore largely less well armed and less well trained than _auxilia_ or
legions,[76] although more prestigious elite irregular native troops were also
utilised.[87] However, the legions still made up around one half of the Roman
army at this point.[79]

By the late Empire, enemy forces in both the East and West were "sufficiently
mobile and sufficiently strong to pierce [the Roman] defensive perimeter on
any selected axis of penetration";[88] from the 3rd century onwards, both
Germanic tribes and Persian armies pierced the frontiers of the Roman
Empire.[89] In response, the Roman army underwent a series of changes, more
organic and evolutionary than the deliberate military reforms of the Republic
and early Empire. A stronger emphasis was placed upon ranged combat ability of
all types, such as field artillery, hand-held _ballistae_ , archery and darts.
Roman forces also gradually became more mobile, with one cavalryman for every
three infantryman, compared to one in forty in the early Empire.[90]
Additionally, the Emperor Gallienus took the revolutionary step of forming an
entirely cavalry field army, which was kept as a mobile reserve at the city of
Milan in northern Italy. It is believed that Gallienus facilitated this
concentration of cavalry by stripping the legions of their integral mounted
element.[91] A diverse range of cavalry regiments existed, including
_catafractarii_ or _clibanarii_ , _scutarii_ , and legionary cavalry known as
_promoti_. Collectively, these regiments were known as _equites_.[87] Around
275 AD, the proportion of _catafractarii_ was also increased.[87] There is
some disagreement over exactly when the relative proportion of cavalry
increased, whether Gallienus' reforms occurred contemporaneously with an
increased reliance on cavalry, or whether these are two distinct events.
Alfoldi appears to believe that Gallienus' reforms were contemporaneous with
an increase in cavalry numbers. He argues that, by 258, Gallienus had made
cavalry the predominant troop type in the Roman army in place of heavy
infantry, which dominated earlier armies.[87] According to Warren Treadgold,
however, the proportion of cavalry did not change between the early 3rd and
early 4th centuries.[92]

Larger groups of _barbari_ began to settle in Rome's territories around this
time, and the troops they were contracted to provide to the Roman army were no
longer organised as _numeri_ but rather were the forerunners of the later
rented native armies known as federated troops (Latin: _foederati_ ). **[Note
4]**[93] Though they served under Roman officers, the troops of these units
were far more barbarised than the _numeri_ , lacked Romanisation of either
military structure or personal ideology, and were ineligible for Roman
citizenship upon discharge.[93] These native troops were not permitted to
fight in native war bands under their own leaders, unlike the later
_foederati_ ; instead, these troops were split into small groups attached to
other Roman units.[94] They existed therefore as a halfway house between
_numeri_ , who were encouraged to be Romanised, and the _foederati_ , who
raised officers from their own ranks and were almost entirely self-dependent.

A distinction between frontier guard troops and more mobile reserve forces had
emerged with the use of certain troops to permanently man frontiers such as
Hadrian's Wall in _Britannia_ in the 2nd century AD. The competing demands of
manned frontiers and strategic reserve forces had led to the division of the
military into four types of troops by the early 4th century:

The permanent field armies of the _palatini_ and _comitatenses_ ultimately
derived from the temporary field armies of the earlier _sacer comitatus_.

Created and expanded from the core troops of the Emperor's personal
bodyguards,[ _clarification needed_ ] the central field armies by 295 AD seem
to have been too large to be accounted for as simple bodyguard forces, but
were still too small to be able to campaign independently of legionary or
vexillation support.[ _clarification needed_ ][104]

Of the four troop types, the _limitanei_ (border guards) were once considered
to have been of the lowest quality,[105] consisting largely of peasant-
soldiers that were both "grossly inferior" to the earlier legions and inferior
also to their counterparts in the mobile field armies.[106] However, more
recent work establishes that the _limitanei_ were regular
soldiers.[96][97][98]

While the _limitanei_ were supposed to deal with policing actions and low-
intensity incursions, the duty of responding to more serious incidents fell
upon the provincial troops.[ _contradictory_ ] The countering of the very
largest scale incursions on a strategic scale was the task of the
_comitatenses_ and _palatini_ or mobile field troops, possibly accompanied by
the emperor's _scholae_. Both border and field armies consisted of a mix of
infantry and cavalry units[107] although the weight of cavalry was, according
to some authorities, greater in the mobile field armies.[103] Overall,
approximately one quarter of the army consisted of cavalry troops[108] but
their importance is uncertain. Older works such as the Eleventh Edition of the
_Encyclopædia Britannica_ (1911) state that the Roman military of the late
Empire was "marked by that predominance of the horseman which characterised
the earlier centuries of the Middle Ages,"[1] but many more recent authors
believe that the infantry remained predominant.[109]

There is some dispute about whether this new military structure was put into
place under the Emperor Diocletian or Constantine since both reorganised the
Roman Army in the late 3rd and early 4th centuries to some degree.[110] Both
Diocletian and even his predecessor of thirty years Gallienus may already have
controlled mobile strategic reserves to assist the empire's border
forces;[111] either Diocletian or Constantine expanded this nascent force into
permanent field armies.[112]

Recruitment from amongst Roman citizens had become greatly curtailed as a
consequence of a declining population,[113] "cripplingly numerous" categories
of those exempted from military service and the spread of Christianity with
its pacifist message. **[Note 5]**[114] Together, these factors culminated in
"the withdrawal of the urban class from all forms of military activity."[115]
In their place, much of Rome's military were now recruited from non-Italian
peoples living within the empire's borders. Many of these people were
barbarians or semi-barbarians recently settled from lands beyond the
empire,[116] including several colonies of _Carpi_ , _Bastarnae_ and
_Sarmatians_.[117]

Although units described as _legiones_ existed as late as the 5th century in
both the border and field armies,[118] the legionary system was very different
from that of the principate and early empire. Since the term legion continued
to be used, it is unclear exactly when the structure and role of the legions
changed. In the 3rd or 4th century, however, the legions' role as elite heavy
infantry was substantially reduced[119] and may have evaporated entirely.[120]
Instead, those "legions" that remained were no longer drawn exclusively (and
perhaps hardly at all) from Roman citizens.[107] Either Diocletian[121] or
Constantine reorganised the legions into smaller infantry units[107] who,
according to some sources, were more lightly armoured than their
forebears.[119] Their lighter armament may have been either because they
"would not consent to wear the same weight of body armour as the legionaries
of old"[122] or, as in at least one documented instance, because they were
prohibited from wearing heavy armour by their general in order to increase
their mobility.[123] 4th-century legions were at times only one sixth the size
of early imperial legions, and they were armed with some combination of
spears, bows, slings, darts and swords, reflecting a greater contemporary
emphasis on ranged fighting.[124] The _auxilia_ and _numeri_ had also largely
disappeared.[125] Constantine further increased the proportion of German
troops in the regular army;[126] their cultural impact was so great that even
legionaries began wearing German dress.[115] At the start of Diocletian's
reign, the Roman army numbered about 390,000 men, but by the end of his reign
he successfully increased the number to 581,000 men.[127]

By the late 4th century, the Empire had become chronically deficient in
raising sufficient troops from amongst its own population.[128] As an
alternative, taxation raised internally was increasingly used to subsidise
growing numbers of barbarian recruits. The Romans had, for some time,
recruited individual non-Roman soldiers into regular military units. In 358
AD, this practice was accelerated by the wholescale adoption of the entire
Salian Franks people into the Empire, providing a ready pool of such recruits.
In return for being allowed to settle as _foederatii_ in northern _Gallia_ on
the near side of the Rhine, the Franks were expected to defend the Empire's
borders in their territory and provide troops to serve in Roman units.

In 376, a large band of Goths asked Emperor Valens for permission to settle on
the southern bank of the Danube River on terms similar to the Franks. The
Goths were also accepted into the empire as _foederati_ ; however, they
rebelled later that year and defeated the Romans at the Battle of Adrianople.
The heavy losses that the Roman military suffered during this defeat
ironically forced the Roman Empire to rely still further on such _foederati_
troops to supplement its forces.[129] In 382, the practice was radically
extended when federated troops were signed up _en masse_ as allied contingents
of _laeti_ and _foederatii_ troops separate from existing Roman units.[128]
Near-constant civil wars during the period 408 and 433 between various Roman
usurpers, emperors and their supposed deputies such as Constantine III,
Constantius III, Aetius and Bonifacius resulted in further losses,
necessitating the handing over of more taxable land to foederati.

The size and composition of these allied forces remains in dispute.
Santosuosso argues that _foederati_ regiments consisted mostly of cavalry[130]
that were raised both as a temporary levy for a specific campaign need and, in
some cases, as a permanent addition to the army. Hugh Elton believes that the
importance of _foederati_ has been overstated in traditional accounts by
historians such as A.H.M. Jones. Elton argues that the majority of soldiers
were probably non-Italian Roman citizens, **[Note 6]**[131] while Santosuosso
believes that the majority of troops were almost certainly non-citizen
_barbari_.[132]

The non-federated mobile field army, known as the _comitatenses_ , was
eventually split into a number of smaller field armies: a central field army
under the emperor's direct control, known as the _comitatensis palatina_ or
_praesentalis_ , and several regional field armies.[26] Historians Santosuosso
and Vogt agree that the latter gradually degraded into low-quality garrison
units similar to the _limitanei_ that they either supplemented or
replaced.[95] By the 5th century, a significant portion of Western Rome's main
military strength lay in rented barbarian mercenaries known as
_foederati_.[133]

As the 5th century progressed, many of the Empire's original borders had been
either wholly or partially denuded of troops to support the central field
army.[133][134] In 395, the Western Roman Empire had several regional field
armies in Italy, Illyricum, Gallia, Britannia and Africa, and about twelve
border armies. By about 430, two more field armies were established in
Hispania and Tingitania but the central government had lost control of
Britannia[134] as well as much of Gaul, Hispania, and Africa. In the same
period, the Eastern Roman Empire had two palatine field armies (at
Constantinople), three regional field armies (in the East, in Thrace, and in
Illyricum) and fifteen frontier armies.[135]

As Roman troops were spread increasingly thin over its long border, the
Empire's territory continued to dwindle in size as the population of the
empire declined.[136] Barbarian war bands increasingly began to penetrate the
Empire's vulnerable borders, both as settlers and invaders. In 451, the Romans
defeated Attila the Hun, but only with assistance from a confederation of
_foederatii_ troops, which included Visigoths, Franks and Alans. As barbarian
incursions continued, some advancing as far as the heart of Italy, Rome's
borders began to collapse, with frontier forces swiftly finding themselves cut
off deep in the enemy's rear.[133]

Simultaneously, barbarian troops in Rome's pay came to be "in a condition of
almost perpetual turbulence and revolt"[137] from 409 onwards. In 476 these
troops finally unseated the last emperor of the Western Roman Empire.[138] The
Eastern Roman forces continued to defend the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) Empire
until its fall in 1453.[139]

The former Oxford University historian Adrian Goldsworthy has argued that the
cause of the fall of the Roman Empire in the West should not be blamed on
barbarization of the late Roman Army, but on its recurrent civil wars, which
led to its inability to repel or defeat invasions from outside its frontiers.
The East Roman or Byzantine empire on the other hand had fewer civil wars to
contend with in the late fourth and early fifth centuries, or in the years
from 383-432 A.D.[140]

  

