**Surzhyk** (Ukrainian: су́ржик, romanized: _súrzhyk_ , IPA: [ˈsurʒɪk]) refers
to a range of mixed (macaronic) sociolects of Ukrainian and Russian languages
used in certain regions of Ukraine and adjacent lands. There is no unifying
set of characteristics; the term is used for "norm-breaking, non-obedience to
or non-awareness of the rules of the Ukrainian and Russian standard
languages".[1] It originates from transition of one language to other through
"false friends of translator" words that sound same in both languages, but
carry different meaning.

The Ukrainian word _surzhyk_ originally referred to flour or bread made from
mixed grains, e.g. wheat with rye.

The vocabulary mix of each of its constituent languages (Ukrainian and
Russian) varies greatly from locality to locality, or sometimes even from
person to person, depending on the degree of education, personal experience,
rural or urban residence, the geographical origin of the interlocutors, etc.
The percentage of Russian words and phonetic influences tends to be greatest
in the east and south and in the vicinity of big Russian-speaking cities. It
is commonly spoken in most of eastern Ukraine's rural areas, with the
exception of the large metropolitan areas of Donetsk, Kharkiv, Luhansk, and
especially Crimea, where the majority of the population uses standard Russian.
In rural areas of western Ukraine, the language spoken contains fewer Russian
elements than in central and eastern Ukraine but has nonetheless been
influenced by Russian.

The ancient common origin, and relatively recent divergence, of Russian and
Ukrainian make it difficult to establish the degree of mixing in a vernacular
of this sort.

According to data presented by the Kyiv International Institute of Sociology
in 2003, 11% to 18% of the people of Ukraine were found to communicate in
Surzhyk. Specifically, in western Ukraine, Surzhyk is spoken by 2.5% of the
population, while in the south, it is spoken by over 12.4% of the population.
In the east, 9.6% of the population speaks Surzhyk. As Western Ukraine has a
higher ratio of Ukrainian speakers to Russian speakers than the rest of
Ukraine, the lesser proportion of Surzhyk speakers compared with the east and
south is understandable.[2]

One problem in analysing the linguistic status of Ukraine is that there is a
tendency for code-mixing errors to exist across the entire spectrum of
languages. In other words, those who identify themselves as Russian-speaking
or Ukrainian-speaking can often be found blending the two languages to some
degree. Only a few of these individuals were found to acknowledge the
incorrectness of the use of either or both languages, or the fact that they
were actually blending Russian and Ukrainian in their speech at all.[3]

Surzhyk originated at the end of the 18th century, when Ukrainian peasants
started to have greater contact with the Russian language as Ukrainian society
modernized. Industrialization resulted in workers migrating from Central
Russia to Ukrainian cities and the urbanization of the Ukrainian peasantry.
Russian civil and military administration, together with cultural, business,
religious and educational institutions, soon became forces of linguistic
Russification.[1] Ukrainian peasants moving to the cities regarded Russian as
being more urban and prestigious than their own language. However, because
their schooling in the Russian language was inadequate, most Ukrainian
peasants who strived to speak it ended up blending it with their native
Ukrainian; this was how Surzhyk was born.[4]

The speaking of pure Ukrainian (i.e. a language without elements of Russian),
was for the most part avoided by the urban intelligentsia, because the
Ukrainian language was associated with provincialism and nationalism.[4] At
this point, the majority of Ukrainians found it easy to become competent in
Russian. The association of the Ukrainian language with a rural lifestyle or
narrow-minded nationalism encouraged more Ukrainians to adopt Russian as their
language of choice.[3] Such decisions led to an increased prevalence of
Surzhyk in everyday speech and the further dilution of the Ukrainian language.

In 1721, the Russian Tsar Peter the Great decreed that the publication of
books in Ukraine, except for Russian-language religious works, would be
prohibited, and Ukrainian books and records were to be burned. In 1786, it was
decreed that services in the Ukrainian Orthodox Church were to be conducted
using only the Russian pronunciation of Old Church Slavonic, and not the
Ukrainian pronunciation. Decrees in 1863, 1876, and 1881 prohibited the
publication and importation of Ukrainian books, as well as the public use of
the Ukrainian language in general. The Russian regime of the day viewed the
use of Ukrainian as evidence of political opposition and harshly suppressed
it.[4]

The use of the Ukrainian language in theatre and music was also banned, and it
had to be translated into other languages. Education in the Ukrainian language
also suffered similarly, with ethnically Ukrainian teachers being replaced
with ethnic Russians. In the early 20th century, children were punished for
speaking Ukrainian to one another in school, and people sometimes lost their
jobs for speaking it.[4]

Austrian and Hungarian rule in western Ukraine in the late 18th and 19th
centuries was also linguistically oppressive. For example, in Zakarpattia,
Hungarian was the only language permitted by the regime, so Ukrainian was
excluded from institutions like schools.[4] Even so, language policies here
were not as restrictive as those applied in eastern Ukraine by the Tsarist
regime of Russia.

In the 1920s, after Ukraine became a part of the Soviet Union, the Ukrainian
language saw a revival under the Soviet policy of _korenizatsiya_
(nativisation), which supported the development of non-Russian languages. The
purpose was to gain the support of those ethnic groups that had been oppressed
by the Tsarist regime. Soviet government business in Ukraine was conducted in
the Ukrainian language, with the aim of integrating the Ukrainian people into
the new Soviet system.[5] This Ukrainianisation brought with it a significant
advance in the development, standardisation, and codification of the Ukrainian
language. Accompanying it was an increase in the number of Ukrainian-language
publications, as well as theatre productions and schools in which Ukrainian
was used.[4]

From the 1930s onwards, the Russian language exerted significant influence on
Ukrainian, and the regime of Joseph Stalin began to actively suppress the
Ukrainian language. Along with many of the other languages spoken in the
Soviet Union, Ukrainian was viewed as a challenge to centralised power and the
linguistic unification of the Soviet people. Terminology and wording that was
similar or identical to Russian was emphasized in dictionaries, grammar books,
and the official guidance issued to editors and publishers. This resulted in a
generally more Russianised Ukrainian than had existed prior to the Soviet
Union. After Ukraine became independent, this outcome would eventually
generate disagreement regarding the question of what constitutes pure
Ukrainian.[4]

Words and other Ukrainian-language speech forms that are similar to those of
Russian were emphasised. In addition, many Russian words or terms replaced
their Ukrainian equivalents and were then modified by Ukrainian grammar and
phonetics. The following table contains a few examples of how the Ukrainian
language was changed during the Soviet era.

(Kolyshniy)

(Buvshyy)

(Byvshiy)

(Prybutky)

(Dokhody)

(Dokhody)

(Vidtak, Vidtodi)

(Z tykh pir)

(S tyekh por)

[4][6]

Members of the cultural elite who promoted local languages were later purged
from positions of authority during the reign of Stalin, as part of an effort
to strengthen the cohesion of the Soviet Union and promote Russian as the
official language of the Soviet Union.[4]

After the collapse of the Soviet Union and the emergence of Ukraine as a
sovereign state, the Ukrainian language became a key issue in the nation's
politics. Ukrainian became Ukraine’s sole official language, and therefore the
ability to master it in speech became an important skill for politicians and
other prominent figures. Many such individuals were speakers of Russian who
began to use Ukrainian, but because they had not perfected it another form of
Surzhyk emerged which clearly showed the effect of Russification on the
Ukrainian language. Linguists began to engage in debates over the 'correct'
way to speak Ukrainian, because the Soviet language policies had had a
profound effect on the Ukrainian language. On the one hand, some linguists
argue that Ukrainian should only use the forms that existed prior to the
Soviet Union, while others argue that the current forms, which emerged from
the Soviet language policy, are more up-to-date and more familiar to the
Ukrainians of today, and would therefore be better at meeting contemporary
needs.[1][4]

In Soviet times, the usage of Ukrainian gradually decreased, particularly
during those times when the Russification policies intensified (i.e. in the
1930s and during the late 1970s to early 1980s), and so a sizable portion of
ethnic Ukrainians possess a better knowledge of formal Russian than they do
formal Ukrainian. Since 1991, however, Ukrainian has been the sole official
language. After this change, it was realised that much of the population of
Ukraine was actually unable to speak Ukrainian fluently. This was highly
apparent in the case of many Ukrainian officials (including the President of
Ukraine), who were observed to make code-mixing mistakes in their speech.[3]

The prevalence of Surzhyk is greatest in the countryside. In the cities,
people tend to speak purer forms of Ukrainian or Russian. This contrasts with
the more rural inhabitants, who lack the prestige associated with the
educational and technological advantages that people in the cities have.
However, in spite of the differences that exist between the rural and urban
varieties of the spoken language, many visitors find that they have trouble
communicating with the local population of Ukraine when they follow guidebooks
published abroad. This is because these books tend to focus on either pure
Russian or pure Ukrainian and disregard the hybrid form.[3]

The speaking of Surzhyk instead of Russian or Ukrainian is viewed negatively
by nationalist language activists. Because it is neither the one nor the
other, they regard Surzhyk as a threat to the uniqueness of Ukrainian
culture.[1]

Nikolai Gogol used the language extensively in his short story collection
_Evenings on a Farm Near Dikanka_. Surzhyk has been an object of parody in
Ukrainian literature since the very emergence of the Ukrainian language. For
example, in the 1798 poem _Eneyida_ , written by Ivan Kotlyarevsky and based
on the Roman poem known as the _Aeneid_ , for satirical purposes the character
"Filozop" speaks Surzhyk while standing over the dead Pallas.[7]

Surzhyk is often also used for comic effect in the arts. Examples include the
short plays of Les Poderviansky, and the repertoire of the pop star Verka
Serdyuchka. The punk-rock group Braty Hadyukiny (literally "Brothers
Viperids") sings many of its songs in Surzhyk, often to underscore the rural
simplicity of its songs' protagonists.

Del Gaudio S. On the Nature of Suržyk: a Double Perspective. Wiener
Slawistischer Almanach, Sonderband 75. München – Berlin – Wien 2010.

