**Talian** (or **Brazilian Venetian**[2], Venetian pronunciation: [taˈljaŋ],
Italian: [taˈljan], Portuguese: [tɐliˈɐ̃] but locally [taliˈɐŋ]) is a dialect
of the Venetian language, spoken primarily in the Serra Gaúcha region in the
northeast of the state of Rio Grande do Sul in Brazil. It is also spoken in
other parts of Rio Grande do Sul, as well as in parts of Espirito
Santo[3][4][5][6][7] and of Santa Catarina.

Despite the similar names, Talian is not derived from standard Italian
(usually called _italiano gramático_ or "grammatical Italian" in Brazil), but
is mainly a mix of Venetian dialects influenced by other Gallo-Italian
languages as well as local Portuguese.

Italian settlers first began arriving into these regions in a wave of
immigration lasting from approximately 1875 to 1914.[8][9] These settlers were
mainly from Veneto, a region in Northern Italy, where Venetian was spoken, but
also from Trentino and Friuli-Venezia Giulia.[8][9] In the south of Brazil
these immigrants settled as smallholders in the region of Encosta da Serra.
There they created three settlements: Conde D'Eu (now, Garibaldi, Rio Grande
do Sul), Dona Isabel (now Bento Gonçalves, Rio Grande do Sul), and Campo dos
Bugres (now Caxias do Sul).[10] As more people arrived, the Italian settlement
expanded beyond these localities.[10] Approximately 100,000 immigrants from
Northern Italy arrived between 1875 and 1910. As time went by, a uniquely
southern Brazilian dialect emerged. Veneto became the basis for Italian-
Brazilian regionalism.

Talian was very much influenced not only by other Italian languages but by
Portuguese, the national language of Brazil. However, because its grammar and
lexicon remain predominantly Venetian, Talian is not considered a creole
language, despite the preponderance of non-Venetian loanwords. It has been
estimated that there have been 130 books published in Talian, including works
of both poetry and prose.[11]

Like Riograndenser Hunsrückisch ( _hunsriqueano riograndense_ ), the main
German dialect spoken by southern Brazilians of German origin, Talian has
suffered great deprecation since the 1940s. At that time, then-President
Getúlio Vargas started a campaign of nationalization (similar to the
Nacionalismo of neighboring Argentina) to try to force non-Portuguese speakers
of Brazil to "better integrate" into the national mainstream culture. Speaking
Talian or German in public, especially in education and press, was forbidden.

Talian is mainly spoken in the southern Brazilian states of Rio Grande do Sul,
Santa Catarina and Paraná, as well as in Espirito Santo.[3][4][5][6][7]
Nowadays, there are approximately 3 million people of Italian ancestry in Rio
Grande do Sul, about 30% of the local population,[10] and approximately 1.7
million people in Espirito Santo, which accounts for 65% of the local
population.[12] According to some estimates, there are up to one million
speakers of Talian today; Ethnologue reported 4,000,000 speakers in the year
2006.[1] During the "Estado Novo" period of the government of Getúlio Vargas,
the use of Talian was declared illegal.[13] As a result of the traumas of
Vargas' policies, there is, even to this day, a stigma attached to speaking
these languages.

In 2009, the legislative assemblies of the states of Rio Grande do Sul and
Santa Catarina approved laws declaring the Talian dialect to be an integral
part of the historical heritage of their respective states.[10][14][15] In
2009, the city of Serafina Corrêa, in the State of Rio Grande do Sul, elected
Talian as co-official language, alongside Portuguese.[16][17] Finally, in 2014
Talian was declared to be part of the cultural heritage of Brazil ( _Língua e
referência cultural brasileira_ ) by the National Institute of Historic and
Artistic Heritage. According to the figure given at this time, there would be
about 500,000 active speakers in 133 towns.[13][18]

Newspapers in the Talian-speaking region feature articles written in the
language. There are approximately 500 radio programs broadcast in Talian.[11]

