The article Christian Broadcasting Network, along with other articles relating
to the Arabâ€“Israeli conflict, is currently subject to active arbitration
remedies resulting from three arbitration cases (see WP:A/I/PIA). The current
restrictions are:

With respect to the WP:1RR restriction:

After being warned, discretionary sanctions can be used against any editor who
repeatedly or seriously fails to adhere to the purpose of Wikipedia, any
expected standards of behaviour, or any normal editorial process.
Discretionary sanctions can include blocks, topic-bans, or other restrictions.  
Reports of violations any of these restrictions should be made to the
Arbitration enforcement noticeboard.  

  

This is a pathetic article concerning a broadcasting operation the size of
CBN. It should be treated as a broadcasting article with lists of stations,
relays, cable systems, satellites, studios, etc. MPLX/MH 01:48, 27 Mar 2005
(UTC)

Seems one-sided to me...

Just because it isn't saying everything there is to say, and that it is
incomplete doesn't make it not neutral. I think this article is as neutral as
it can get

It may be more incomplete than biased. I'm a CBN supporter (though Pat
Robertson's recent controversial statements haven't pleased me, to say the
least), and I think the article seems pretty neutral. A list of stations and
cable systems would be too big a task for this article, and is constantly
changing anyway. As for studios, I visited the main one in Virginia last
summer, and I know of one in Nashville, Tennessee now. Realkyhick 22:18, 31
January 2006 (UTC)

The article should discuss the history of the organization. As it stands, a
reader would not know that CBN started out as a radio service, when Robertson
purchased the old Rural Radio Network in upstate New York. 121a0012 04:12, 6
May 2006 (UTC)

Any thoughts to add the section in regards to CBN and the Arab-Israeli issue?
Pat Robertson seems to support Israel according to the 2006 NY Time article.

\--69.157.127.100 (talk) 04:11, 24 August 2019 (UTC)

