As requested, here is a followup to my earlier peer review comments. The
article looks much better, but still needs a lot of improvements to fully
comply with the WP:MOS. Here are some suggestions for improvement.

Hope this helps. If my comments are useful, please consider peer reviewing an
article, especially one at Wikipedia:Peer review/backlog (which is how I found
this article). I do not watch peer reviews, so if you have questions or
comments, please contact me on my talk page. Yours, Ruhrfisch **> <>°°**
16:16, 29 March 2011 (UTC)

The author of this page needs to do a little research into correct heraldic
terminology. RAF unit insignia are not crests. They are properly called
badges.109.158.158.164 (talk) 13:47, 10 April 2012 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 2 external links on RAF Uxbridge. Please take a moment to
review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to ignore the
links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for additional
information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 18:56, 19 May 2017 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 10 external links on RAF Uxbridge. Please take a moment
to review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to ignore the
links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for additional
information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 20:57, 23 September 2017 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 3 external links on RAF Uxbridge. Please take a moment to
review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to ignore the
links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for additional
information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 02:25, 30 September 2017 (UTC)

Why is it necessary to have 2 images of the same file?.....File:Spitfire at
RAF Uxbridge - geograph.org.uk - 335504.jpg — Preceding unsigned comment added
by 79.67.53.55 (talk) 08:08, 1 April 2018 (UTC)

