The name of the defense forces is given in English and in Tetum, but what
language is "Forças de Defesa de Timor Leste"? LordAmeth (talk) 21:33, 20
January 2008 (UTC)

  

Propose that this page be moved to East Timor Defence Force as this is the
closest translation of _Forças de Defesa de Timor Leste_. I have worked in
Timor Leste as a government advisor, including with FDTL, and have never heard
anybody ever refer to the FDTL as Military of East Timor. Ex nihil (talk)
06:57, 5 March 2008 (UTC)

I can understand the argument to list the defence force by it's official name,
but this certainly shouldn't be taken as a precedent to change everything else
to "Timor Leste" when it is not the name the country is most well recognised
by (as required by WP:NAME).--Merbabu (talk) 10:24, 5 March 2008 (UTC)

Is "Naval Component" meant to be a proper noun - ie, an actual name? Or should
it be written as "naval component". If it is a proper noun, then we shouldn't
be saying " **a** Naval Component"--Merbabu (talk) 08:04, 27 March 2009 (UTC)

This story in the Chinese People's Daily Onsite has copied and pasted several
paras worth of material from this article without attribution. Nick-D (talk)
23:13, 20 August 2009 (UTC)

For background, original title was 'Conscription in East Timor':

Hi, Do you know if East Timor currently has military conscription in place?
This 2008 UNHCR-sponsored report says it was introduced in 2007 but the CIA
World Fact Book says that there was no conscription as at 2008. Nick-D (talk)
07:57, 6 August 2010 (UTC)

I spoke to an official in the UNMIT Security Sector Support Unit in April-May.
The force size is ~717 + 579 new recruits from December 2009, minus 11
deceased. 150 of those new recruits are going to the naval component. Those
recruits (implied) were volunteers; as you wrote yourself, thousands tried for
the few spots in the 2nd Battalion earlier. Much of that should be reflected
in the link above, which is a powerpoint briefing from the chief of the U.S.
Office of Defence Cooperation at the Embassy in Dili. TMR is now a Major
General; Lere An Timor a Brigadier. A third battalion is under consideration
and the force size aim is still 3,000 by 2020. Note in your link that there is
no confirmation that this legal provision is to be enforced; like the
Selective Service System in the United States. Buckshot06 (talk) 09:35, 6
August 2010 (UTC)

The ISBN given for Patrikainen et al (2011) _Jane's Sentinel Country Risk
Assessments: Southeast Asia_ issue 29 is clearly not correct, at only 8
character long. Do these Jane's publications have ISBNs at all? George
Ponderevo (talk) 13:21, 29 May 2012 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 3 external links on Timor Leste Defence Force. Please
take a moment to review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to
ignore the links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for
additional information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 21:13, 20 May 2017 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 4 external links on Timor Leste Defence Force. Please
take a moment to review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to
ignore the links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for
additional information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 20:07, 2 September 2017 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 3 external links on Timor Leste Defence Force. Please
take a moment to review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to
ignore the links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for
additional information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 16:27, 23 September 2017 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 3 external links on Timor Leste Defence Force. Please
take a moment to review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to
ignore the links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for
additional information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 23:44, 29 September 2017 (UTC)

