This talk page is for an article related to **KFC**. If you wish to post a
comment about a specific _KFC_ related topic, please see one of the associated
articles listed below.

Category:Christmas food 76.88.107.122 (talk) 04:07, 26 April 2016 (UTC)

Kjhuiopn (talk) 22:50, 10 May 2016 (UTC)

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/a/a2/X_mark.svg/18px-
X_mark.svg.png) **Not done** –Please explain what kind of changes are
desired.--☾Loriendrew☽ ☏ _(ring-ring)_ 23:25, 10 May 2016 (UTC)

  
Please add information into this line "In Singapore, the first KFC franchise
was opened in Somerset Road", new entry could be "In Singapore, the first KFC
franchise was opened in 1977 along Somerset Road" [1].

Existing citation #53 is broken.

There is no reliable evidence that it was in 2002 that this happened. Please
amend "In 2002, KFC Singapore was acquired by KFC (Malaysia) Holdings Bhd" to
"KFC restaurants in Singapore are currently owned and operated by KFC Holdings
(Malaysia) Bhd" [2]

Obliviate1975 (talk) 13:44, 22 August 2016 (UTC)

**References**

{{kfc was founded by henry maltby

62.254.225.205 (talk) 09:50, 2 November 2016 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 5 external links on KFC. Please take a moment to review
my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to ignore the links, or
the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for additional information.
I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 12:26, 30 April 2017 (UTC)

KFC restaurant is also in Nepal so i think there should be nepal in asia
content 202.38.4.48 (talk) 05:26, 8 May 2017 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 4 external links on KFC. Please take a moment to review
my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to ignore the links, or
the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for additional information.
I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 08:01, 12 May 2017 (UTC)

I NEED TO EDIT NOW.

Hello, KFC have 13 restaurants in Africa, in Marocco more precisely. 2 in
Rabat, 3 in Marrakech, 1 in Tanger and 7 in Casablanca. Morocco is mentionned
as Middle-Eastern country in the article but Marocco is in Africa and not in
Middle-East. Thank you ! 197.22.13.75 (talk) 15:24, 1 July 2017 (UTC)

Change these source links back from:

To:

KFC still uses the name Kentucky Fried Chicken. I've seen the name being used
after 1991 as there were restaurants after 1991 that said "Kentucky Fried
Chicken" such as KFC restaurants. What do you mean they don't use that name
anymore?

Do you mean it's still their official name but they don't use it as their
common name anymore? As you can see on the official website, they still use
the Kentucky Fried Chicken name. Maybe they don't use the Kentucky Fried
Chicken name in advertisements anymore? Or maybe they decided to shorten the
name to KFC too?

This can cause a lot of users, including me. When I saw this in the first
sentence, I thought that KFC had dumped the "Kentucky Fried Chicken" name and
started to use the KFC name instead.

Prodigy55 (talk) 02:54, 27 August 2017 (UTC)

**KFC Thailand**

KFC is one of the largest and most popular Quick Service Restaurants in the
world. It was founded in 1952 by Colonel Harland David Sanders, who is
committed to inventing and developing fried chicken recipes with his
commitment and passion to offer delicious fried chicken with a unique taste
and the highest standards. The whole production process came from his
thoughtful and creative to make fried chicken a favourite menu of people
around the world. The story of Colonel Sanders has become an inspiration and
impetus for the present generation. As an open-minded person who always looks
for a new opportunity, throughout his life, Colonel Sanders has gone through
many occupations. And it took a long time for him to develop the fried chicken
recipe until it was acceptable. He was denied as much as 1,009 times before he
could sell his first franchise.

In Thailand, KFC opened its first store at Central Ladprao in 1984. KFC
Thailand is now the number one Quick Service Restaurant chain in Thailand with
more than 600 branches. (August 2017) Yum! Restaurants International
(Thailand) Co, Ltd is the brand and franchise operator. Its franchisees
include Central Restaurants Group Co, Ltd, Restaurants Development Co, Ltd and
QSR of Asia Co, Ltd. KFC Thailand continues to dominate the market with
innovation and branch expansion. The goal is to expand more than 800 branches
by 2020. KFC is committed to innovating and introducing new food menus with
unique taste, high quality and safety in accordance with global standards. It
is ready to improve the quality of employees to provide the warmest and best
service experience to customers at the store and delivery service via Call
Center 1150 and www.kfc.co.th, including www.kfcthailand.com for general
information.

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified one external link on KFC. Please take a moment to review
my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to ignore the links, or
the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for additional information.
I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 20:08, 30 September 2017 (UTC)

New Information

Some new information to the 2017 KFC controversy in Hungary. Also the previous
edit seems a little biased, I also suggest a word to be changed due to that
reason (professionally to quickly). Please change the last paragraph:

"In 2017 KFC paid 500,000 HUF (~1900 USD) to a charity chosen by a journalist,
who was beaten by the security guard of a KFC in Budapest, Hungary [200]. KFC
reacted professionally, fired the security guard and paid the requested
amount, that the journalist offered to charities. Protests broke out in front
of this Hungarian KFC and the bad publicity pressured KFC to act."

to

"In 2017 KFC paid 500,000 HUF (~1900 USD) to a charity chosen by a journalist,
who was beaten by the security guard of a KFC with the consent of the
restaurant's assign leader in Budapest, Hungary [200]. KFC reacted quickly,
fired the security guard and paid the requested amount, that the journalist
offered to charities. The security company was caught on large malpractice.
KFC didn't close the restaurant, neither fired the leader. Protests broke out
in front of this Hungarian KFC and it was the bad publicity that pressured KFC
to act."

  
http://index.hu/gazdasag/2017/10/17/fura_ceg_alkalmazottja_volt_a_kollegankat_megvero_kirugott_biztonsagi_or/
37.76.98.132 (talk) 10:51, 21 October 2017 (UTC)

Index.hu is a premium Hungarian online news portal. The victim happened to be
a journalist working for index.hu, so most of the references in the news in
Hungary about the case was index's articles. Together with some other
newspapers they also started to investigate the security company, and found
these information.

For a broader reference, I'd suggest google search for

https://www.google.hu/search?q=kfc+kir%C3%A1ly+utca

or

https://www.google.hu/search?q=kfc+botr%C3%A1ny&oq=kfc+botr%C3%A1ny

Search results are in Hungarian, too. Although translate.google.com is not
quite good for Hungarian langage, in most cases it gives translations that can
more or less be understood.

The reason why KFC reacted surprisingly quickly: http://24.hu/poszt-
itt/2017/10/17/a-kfc-botrany-esete-magyarorszaggal/

The malpractices of the security company:
http://index.hu/gazdasag/2017/10/17/fura_ceg_alkalmazottja_volt_a_kollegankat_megvero_kirugott_biztonsagi_or

The reaction of KFC:
http://hvg.hu/itthon/20171016_A_KFC_teljes_kivizsgalast_iger_a_megvert_ujsagiro_ugyeben
37.76.11.229 (talk) 12:01, 27 October 2017 (UTC)

More precisely the first article appeared in hvg.hu as an independent source,
not in index.hu:
http://hvg.hu/itthon/20171016_Az_Index_hires_ujsagiroja_panaszkodni_akart_veresre_vertek_a_gyorsetteremben

Another detail that actually explaines how KFC got off that cheaply : the
journalist was a KFC fan privately and "the biggest fan of KFC" in the press,
so he didn't want KFC neither to be seriously fined, nor to sue them. Don't
know if something about this should be included.

Anyway the main point in this story was, they had to react very quickly,
because the victim was a journalist. Even though he only mentioned the
incident on his facebook
(https://www.facebook.com/szaboze/posts/10155823355532363), it appeared on
news rapidly, likely more articles in a day than about parliament and North
Korea together.

This kind of incident is likely frequent in that restaurant close to the
nightlife center of the city. The security guard thought he was drunk when he
started to complain about the quality of the service. The other brutal events
remain unheard-of (http://24.hu/poszt-itt/2017/10/17/a-kfc-botrany-esete-
magyarorszaggal/). 37.76.57.86 (talk) 17:17, 27 October 2017 (UTC)

  

  

https://index.hu/belfold/2017/12/18/megegyezett_a_kfc_a_megvert_vendeggel_jotekony_ugyeket_tamogat/

Fresh news about the close of the incident: no penalty for the manager.
However it seems that truth is not really a matter here. Don't you want to
correct the text already, which was originally likely composed by someone
related to KFC? 37.76.35.1 (talk) 19:36, 18 December 2017 (UTC)

Nonetheless, the matter is certainly still open for more discussion. ToThAc
(talk) 22:24, 27 January 2018 (UTC)

I apologize for helping. I have already provided a dozen reliable sources. The
only excuse so far was that they are in Hungarian. According to this,
Wikipedia should not contain information about foreign countries at all! Shall
I make even more changes, that's what you suggest? I wrote the truth, and the
proposed text was and is the truth. Forgive me, I am not planning to work more
in vain. No more discussion is needed here, everything is made clear.
Discussion would need at least two people anyway. 37.76.2.20 (talk) 09:50, 7
February 2018 (UTC)

In the Reference named "autogenerated6" ("So Good? KFC Drops Famous
Catchphrase"), please add "|archive-
url=https://web.archive.org/web/20120719094251/http://news.sky.com/story/838088/so-
good-kfc-drops-famous-catchphrase |archive-date=July 19, 2012".
2001:BB6:4703:4A58:65E4:F29C:414A:48A8 (talk) 12:35, 20 February 2018 (UTC)

"Poultry is divided into 9 different cuts (2 drumsticks, 2 thighs, 2 wings, 1
keel, and a backbone-based breast cut divided into 2 pieces)." I have never
seen keels at KFC. --Khajidha (talk) 12:39, 25 March 2018 (UTC)

I am Finnish Wikipedia Author, and I know that Finland will receive in 2019
KFC restaurants. Because I read Finnish magazines and I read Finnish sources.
So could you write it too to the Europe part? --AkselHelp (talk) 16:44, 28
September 2018 (UTC)

Shouldn`t there be mention of bad business practices as per this([1]) fox news
report? The MacDonalds "chicken" nugget production-line scandal has had
millions of views on youtube, but KFC is notably up there as well. The
question of US beef containing steroids, etc, does not apply to KFC in
countries where they source their chicken locally, but some of the production-
line inevitably leads to the USA. — Preceding unsigned comment added by
126.3.16.59 (talk) 08:51, 4 October 2018 (UTC)

**References**

Is there some way in keeping with WP guidelines in which it can be mentioned
that the criticisms lodged against the company come from long-established
left-wing pressure groups? They are not grass-roots movements that arose in
response to any perceived wrongdoing on the part of Kentucky Fried Chicken.
For instance, PETA is, on principle, opposed to the killing of animals for
food, so there is nothing KFC can do, short of ceasing to sell chicken, that
would be satisfactory. Similarly, Greenpeace's concern over the Amazon rain
forest is a long-standing platform of that organisation, independent of
anything to do with KFC. For the sake of completeness, such issues should be
brought up in the article.2A02:2454:8524:2500:8980:8BA9:51EE:B166 (talk)
09:11, 11 April 2019 (UTC)

Please change the current kfc logo
(https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:KFC_logo.svg) to this logo
(https://www.flickr.com/gp/171170878@N08/8eq047) because the old logo is
outdated and the second logo is the most up to date. KFC's current advertising
agency, Wieden and Kennedy (https://www.wk.com/work/brand/kfc) would like the
logo to be updated based on their current KFC brand guidelines.

This is a logo for KFC. Further details: The KFC Logo.

The logo may be obtained from KFC.

KFC

The entire logo is used to convey the meaning intended and avoid tarnishing or
misrepresenting the intended image.

The logo is of a size and resolution sufficient to maintain the quality
intended by the company or organization, without being unnecessarily high
resolution.

The image is used to identify the brand KFC, a subject of public interest. The
significance of the logo is to help the reader identify the brand, assure the
readers that they have reached the right article containing critical
commentary about the brand, and illustrate the nature of the brand in a way
that words alone could not convey.

The image is a non-free logo (and thus cannot be replaced by a free
alternative).

Use of the logo in the article complies with Wikipedia non-free content
policy, logo guidelines, and fair use under United States copyright law as
described above.

Alexandra.Disney (talk) 22:06, 23 April 2019 (UTC)

