**Image:NSUSeal.jpg** is being used on this article. I notice the image page
specifies that the image is being used under fair use but there is no
explanation or rationale as to why its use in **this** Wikipedia article
constitutes fair use. In addition to the boilerplate fair use template, you
must also write out on the image description page a specific explanation or
rationale for why using this image in each article is consistent with fair
use.

Please go to the image description page and edit it to include a fair use
rationale. Using one of the templates at Wikipedia:Fair use rationale
guideline is an easy way to insure that your image is in compliance with
Wikipedia policy, but remember that you must complete the template. Do not
simply insert a blank template on an image page.

If there is other other fair use media, consider checking that you have
specified the fair use rationale on the other images used on this page. Note
that any fair use images uploaded after 4 May, 2006, and lacking such an
explanation will be deleted one week after they have been uploaded, as
described on criteria for speedy deletion. If you have any questions please
ask them at the Media copyright questions page. Thank you.BetacommandBot
04:47, 5 June 2007 (UTC)

Is the logo currently used in the infobox the university's logo or the
athletic logo? Absolon S. Kent 17:08, 26 October 2007 (UTC)

Editing notes are here. Absolon S. Kent (talk) 20:07, 3 January 2008 (UTC)

The Norfolk State University article has been selected for the WikiProject
Universities Collaboration of the Fortnight which will begin on 04 Jan 2008.
Please take a look at the WikiProject's article guidelines and help improve
the article. If you have any questions regarding the COTF or have
questions/problems on how to improve the article, please place them here.
Absolon S. Kent (talk) 20:07, 3 January 2008 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just added archive links to 2 external links on Norfolk State
University. Please take a moment to review my edit. If necessary, add
`{{cbignore}}` after the link to keep me from modifying it. Alternatively, you
can add `{{nobots|deny=InternetArchiveBot}}` to keep me off the page
altogether. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, please set the _checked_
parameter below to **true** to let others know.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.—cyberbot IITalk to my owner:Online 11:46, 7 January 2016 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified one external link on Norfolk State University. Please
take a moment to review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to
ignore the links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for
additional information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 17:18, 24 May 2017 (UTC)

Hello fellow Wikipedians,

I have just modified 7 external links on Norfolk State University. Please take
a moment to review my edit. If you have any questions, or need the bot to
ignore the links, or the page altogether, please visit this simple FaQ for
additional information. I made the following changes:

When you have finished reviewing my changes, you may follow the instructions
on the template below to fix any issues with the URLs.

As of February 2018, "External links modified" talk page sections are no
longer generated or monitored by **InternetArchiveBot**. No special action is
required regarding these talk page notices, other than regular verification
using the archive tool instructions below. Editors have permission to delete
the "External links modified" sections if they want, but see the RfC before
doing mass systematic removals. This message is updated dynamically through
the template `{{sourcecheck}}` (last update: 15 July 2018).

  
Cheers.— **InternetArchiveBot** (Report bug) 20:15, 9 June 2017 (UTC)

