Steve's been wanting a template for Louisville, so I created one. Doing one
based on Los Angeles, as he recommended, was not working, so I based it off
the New York City one. I based the prominent neighborhoods on those most
prominently mentioned in the corresponding article, although I knew the
Highlands should have been mentioned. Any other considerations?--Bedford
20:54, 7 May 2007 (UTC)

Should the Falls of the Ohio link be to the National Wildlife Conservation
Area, or to the State Park?--Bedford 06:42, 10 May 2007 (UTC)

Would there be any objection to giving this template a gold-like color rather
than purple? I recently pulled the goldish color from the city's seal that I'm
now using in WikiProject Louisville. **Stevie is the man!** Talk • Work 00:02,
1 June 2007 (UTC)

We may want to include neighborhoods outside of the original Louisville city
limits, such as Fairdale. Also, we may want to reduce the size of the fonts
used for the neighborhoods, else this template might get very thick. **Stevie
is the man!** Talk • Work 21:21, 20 June 2007 (UTC)

YUCK! That template is way too big. Sometimes too much information is worse
than not enough. This qualifies.--Bedford 23:38, 20 June 2007 (UTC)

I reduced the font sizes and removed the miscellaneous items, as I'm afraid
there's no way to objectively decide what those items _should_ be, beyond the
obvious Kentucky Derby. Also, it appears that we still have more neighborhoods
and suburbs to add. Last, the bottom area should probably only show suburbs
outside of Jefferson County. **Stevie is the man!** Talk • Work 00:45, 21 June
2007 (UTC)

1) Civil War -- Yep, this was subjective 2) Falls of the Ohio -- Seeing as how
if it wasn't for this there would be no Louisville, especially not one that is
16th in size, I think the only thing problematic is choosign whether to use
the State park or the National Wildlife 3) Fort Knox -- Worldwide famous, but
need to be eliminated for the same reasons you were removing WP Louisville
tags from Scott County 4) Hillerich & Bradsby -- Louisville Slugger is
questionable??? 5) Kentucky Derby -- There's no debate on this 6) Water Tower
-- National Historic Landmark. I had also thought of including the Marine
Hospital, but that would almost require us putting **EVERY** NHL on it.--
Bedford 01:36, 21 June 2007 (UTC)

Idea: We may want to split this up into separate templates. The bottom line
for a general Louisville template is it should link to its significant
category/subpage articles, like what's on the first line. **Stevie is the
man!** Talk • Work 01:12, 21 June 2007 (UTC)

This is way too big with all the neighborhoods... I don't think they're of
that much interest (and I wrote most of the content in these articles). The
{{Louisville places}} template was an effort to connect neighborhood articles
in a useful way... I just haven't added it to all the articles yet. I'd
support going back to what {{Louisville}} used to look like. --W.marsh 02:02,
21 June 2007 (UTC)

Let's break it up with a new template just for neighborhoods, and leave the
old template as was. Angry Aspie 13:56, 21 June 2007 (UTC)

I just added two top subjects.

I realize that we should want to keep this template section tight, but I
realized that these two subjects were glaring omissions based on their
importance to the city. **Stevie is the man!** Talk • Work 10:36, 1 October
2014 (UTC)

On further thought, Muhammad Ali seems to be a good choice as a top subject as
well, although maybe controversial. It seems to me that he's the city's
favorite son based on his storied career as well as the things in the city
that honor him. It's hard to think of a greater Louisville icon than Ali.
**Stevie is the man!** Talk • Work 10:45, 1 October 2014 (UTC)

I also added L&N as a top subject due to being so key to the city's
development. **Stevie is the man!** Talk • Work 13:08, 1 October 2014 (UTC)

When reviewing other key aspects of Louisville, I realized other subject areas
and articles were missing, and then after adding them, I realized that a split
of "Subject areas" was in order. I created History and Geography sections to
capture those added articles. Please feel free to voice any concerns if I've
done anything objectionable or just needs more adjustments. **Stevie is the
man!** Talk • Work 13:13, 1 October 2014 (UTC)

I appreciate attempts to tidy up the template, but the recent tidying left
dangling curly brackets and allowed subarticles (in parens) to wrap. Also, a
category was removed from content categorization even though the template
encapsulates content. I'm certainly open to making the template better, but
tidying needs to not create new issues. **Stevie is the man!** Talk • Work
16:57, 8 October 2014 (UTC)

