Michael Dees sings "Theme from _New York, New York_"[1][2]  
Joan Kenley as woman on the phone

" **The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson** " is the first episode of _The
Simpsons_ ' ninth season. It was originally broadcast on the Fox network in
the United States on September 21, 1997, as the 179th episode of the series.
The episode features the Simpson family traveling to Manhattan to recover the
family car, which was taken by Barney Gumble and abandoned outside the World
Trade Center, where it has been repeatedly posted with parking tickets, and
disabled with a parking boot.

Writer Ian Maxtone-Graham was interested in making an episode where the
Simpson family travels to New York to retrieve their misplaced car. Executive
producers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein suggested that the car be found in
Austin J. Tobin Plaza at the World Trade Center, as they wanted a location
that would be widely known. Great lengths were taken to make a detailed
replica of the borough of Manhattan. The episode received generally positive
reviews, and has since been on accolade lists of _The Simpsons_ episodes. The
"You're Checkin' In" musical sequence won two awards. Because of the World
Trade Center's main role, the episode was taken off syndication in many areas
following the September 11 attacks, but had come back into syndication by
2006.

At Moe's Tavern, Moe informs Homer and his friends that one of them must be a
designated driver, and Barney loses the choosing draw. After Barney drives the
drunken men home in Homer's car, Homer allows him to use it to drive himself
home, expecting Barney to return it the following morning. In his distressed
state, Barney disappears with the car. Two months later, Barney returns to
Moe's Tavern, unable to recall where he left the car. Homer later receives a
letter from the New York City government, which informs him that his car has
been found parked in the World Trade Center plaza and will be destroyed if not
picked up in 72 hours. Homer reveals to the family that he had once been to
New York before when he was 17 years old, and had a horrible experience. Marge
and the children persuade Homer to go retrieve the car, and he reluctantly
agrees.

When the family arrives in Manhattan, they decide to split up. Upon arrival at
his car, Homer discovers it has been issued many parking tickets and has been
wheel clamped. While waiting for parking officer Steve Grabowski to come and
remove the clamp, Homer drinks an excessive amount of crab juice from a food
vendor and needs to urinate, but is afraid to leave his car behind. After
several hours of holding it in and failing to urinate in a mailbox, he finally
goes to the restroom at the South Tower's indoor observation deck, but
discovers that it is out of order and must use the one at the top of the North
Tower. While he is doing that, the officer arrives at the car and, finding no
one present, issues another ticket and leaves; Homer's subsequent "D'oh!"
echoes across the city. Meanwhile, the rest of the family tours the Statue of
Liberty, Little Italy, Chinatown, and the Empire State Building. Bart leaves
the group to visit the offices of _Mad_ magazine, and is in awe when he sees
Alfred E. Neuman. The family attends a Broadway musical about the Betty Ford
Clinic, and then takes a carriage through Central Park to where they are
planning to meet Homer.

Upon returning to the car, Homer realizes he must make it to Central Park to
find his family and leave before it gets dark. Ignoring the wheel clamp, he
tries to accelerate and in the process destroys the car's fender. Homer stops
by a road construction crew and steals a jackhammer so he can use it to remove
the clamp. The car is freed from the clamp, but further damaged as a result.
Homer races to Central Park and reunites with his family. While driving back
to Springfield, the family reflects on their wonderful time, while Homer's
hatred for New York remains.[3][4]

Writer Ian Maxtone-Graham, a former resident of New York, had conceived the
idea of having the family travel to the city to locate their missing car and
believed it to be "a classic Manhattan problem".[5] Bill Oakley, who had
visited the World Trade Center when the construction of the towers was
completed in 1973, suggested parking the car in the plaza of the buildings.[6]
Josh Weinstein observed that, "When we realized that there was a plaza between
the two towers, we knew it was a perfect spot to have Homer's car."[7]

The animators were told to make a detailed replica of the city. David
Silverman was sent to Manhattan to take hundreds of pictures of the city and
areas around the World Trade Center.[6] When he returned, Lance Wilder and his
team spent time creating new scenes and backgrounds, incorporating small
details such as signs and hundreds of extras that would correctly illustrate
the city.[8] Oakley and Weinstein were pleased with the final results, and
both noted that the buildings, streets, and even elevator cabins were detailed
closely to their real life counterparts.[6][7] In the final scene, as the
family is seen driving away from New York on the George Washington Bridge, the
credits roll with the "camera" gradually pulling back from a view of the car,
to a view of the side, and then on to a panorama view of the city; as if the
whole sequence was being shot from a helicopter. To achieve this effect, a
computer model of the bridge pulling out was made and then printed out. With
the print outs, photocopies were made traced onto the animation cels.[8] The
process took a long time and was expensive, as the use of computer animation
was not widespread when the episode was produced. Director Jim Reardon wanted
to replicate films that ended in a similar way, and commented, "I remembered
that every movie located in New York would pull back if you were leaving town
on a bridge."[8] Shortly before the episode aired, the production staff
contacted Fox to make sure they would not run commercials during the
credits.[7]

Ken Keeler, who wrote the lyrics for the "You're Checkin' In" musical number,
spent two hours in a room alone to write the song. Upon sharing the lyrics
with the rest of the production staff, some revisions were made, although
little was changed. Bill Oakley was unsatisfied with the part of the musical
where the actor sings, "Hey, that's just my aspirin!", claiming that a better
line could have been written.[6]

The song used during Duffman's first and subsequent appearances is "Oh Yeah"
by Yello, popularized in the final scene of the film _Ferris Bueller's Day
Off_.[6] The Original Famous Ray's Pizza shop Homer sees is a parody of
independently owned pizza stores that carry the name "Ray" in their name.[6]
The musical sequence played during the Flushing Meadows segment is a stylistic
parody of the piece "Flower Duet" from the opera _Lakmé_ by Leo Delibes. When
the traveling bus passes some Hasidic Jews, Bart mistakes them for ZZ
Top,[1][3] and when he visits _Mad_ magazine's offices, he sees Alfred E.
Neuman, the _Spy vs. Spy_ characters, and cartoonist Dave Berg.[1] The actor
in the musical number "You're Checkin' In" was based on Robert Downey Jr., who
was battling a cocaine addiction during the time of the episode creation, just
as the character in the musical was.[5][9] The sequence where Homer races
alongside the carriage in Central Park was a reference to a similar scene in
the film _Ben-Hur_.[1][3] The final scene when the family is crossing the
George Washington Bridge uses a version of the song "Theme from _New York, New
York_", which continues to play throughout the credits.[1]

Several cultural references are made during Homer's flashback to his previous
visit to New York City. During the entire flashback, "The Entertainer", a
piece made famous by the film _The Sting_ , is played.[1] Writer Ian Maxtone-
Graham had brought the piece to the attention of director Jim Reardon and
asked him to try to fit the piece into the flashback. Maxtone-Graham later
commented, "It turned out that the music and the visual gags fit each other
perfectly."[5] In the beginning of the scene, Homer passes by three
pornographic film theaters, which are playing _The Godfather's Parts, II_ ,
_Jeremiah's Johnson_ , and _Five Sleazy Pieces_ , plays on the names of _The
Godfather Part II_ , _Jeremiah Johnson_ , and _Five Easy Pieces_ ,
respectively.[3] A character resembling Woody Allen can be seen during the
flashback, pouring trash out of his window onto Homer.[1][3]

A scene from this episode contains a coincidence that might seen as
foreshadowing the September 11 destructions of the World Trade Center towers:
in it, Lisa holds a brochure for a $9 bus fare with the World Trade Center
shown in the background.[10] Showrunner Al Jean said in an interview with _The
New York Times_ in 2018, "There is a frame where there's a brochure that says
New York at $9 a day, and behind the nine are the twin towers. So they look
like an 11, and it looks like a 9/11. That one is a completely bizarre,
strange thing."[11] Bill Oakley, the episode's showrunner, reacted to a _New
York Observer_ article in 2010 via Twitter by saying, "$9 was picked as a
comically cheap fare...To make an ad for it, the artist logically chose to
include a silhouette of NYC. I signed off on the design. It's pretty self-
explanatory. And I will grant that it's eerie given that it's on the only
episode of any series ever that had an entire act of World Trade Center
jokes."[10]

In its original broadcast, "The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson" finished
18th in ratings for the week of September 15–21, 1997, with a Nielsen rating
of 10.7, equivalent to approximately 10.5 million viewing households. It was
the highest-rated show on the Fox network that week, beating _King of the
Hill_ 's season two opener "How to Fire a Rifle Without Really Trying".[12]

The episode was mostly well received. The song "You're Checkin' In" won a 1998
Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Music and
Lyrics,[13] and an Annie Award for Outstanding Music in an Animated Television
Production in the same year.[14] In honor of _The Simpsons_ ' 300th episode
milestone in 2003, _Entertainment Weekly_ ranked the episode at number 13 on
the list of their 25 favorite episodes,[15] and _AskMen_ ranked the episode at
number seven on their top ten;[16] in both cases it was the second-most-recent
installment chosen to co-inhabit the lists. _IGN_ named the episode the best
of the ninth season, claiming "this is a very funny episode that started
season 9 off on a strong note".[17] Since the release of the season nine DVD
box set, the episode has been highlighted by newspaper reviewers to show
excellence of the season.[18][19][20][21]

Ian Jones and Steve Williams, writers for British review website _Off the
Telly_ , claimed that the episode "ditched all pretence of a plot and went
flat out for individual, unconnected sight gags and vignettes". The two noted
that it was their least favorite debut episode for a season of _The
Simpsons_.[22] In a separate article in _Off the Telly_ , Jones and Williams
write that the episode "... wasn't shown for reasons of taste and has never
appeared on terrestrial television in Britain", referring to a BBC Two
schedule of the ninth season, which began in October 2001.[23]

Due to the prominence of the World Trade Center in the plot, the episode was
removed from syndication after the September 11 attacks.[6][24] By 2006, the
episode had come back into syndication in some areas; however, parts of the
episode were often edited out.[7] One previously such edited item is a scene
of two men arguing across Tower 1 and Tower 2, where a man from Tower 2
claims, "They stick all the jerks in Tower 1." Co-executive producer Bill
Oakley commented in retrospect that the line was "regrettable".[6] In 2019, a
hand-drawn cel from the episode, depicting the two towers, was given to the
National September 11 Memorial & Museum, in what the curator termed a
"hilarious and tender" donation.[25]

