**The Futon Critic** is a website that provides articles and information
regarding prime time programming on broadcast and cable networks in the United
States. The site publishes reviews of prime time programming and interviews of
people in the television industry, as well as republishing Nielsen ratings
data reports and press releases provided by television networks. _The Futon
Critic_ was founded by Brian Ford Sullivan in 1997.

Brian Ford Sullivan, CEO of Futon Media, registered _The Futon Critic_ on
January 14, 1997.[1][2] From its founding, the site has published reviews on
prime time programming, as well as interviews its staff conducted with members
of the television industry.[3] The site also contains sections of articles
dedicated to republishing press releases, network schedules and Nielsen
ratings data, which have been cited by articles on websites such as _The
Huffington Post_ and TV by the Numbers.[4][5][6] Its publications of Nielsen
ratings data have also been used as a resource by institutions such as the
University of Colorado Boulder and Temple University.[7][8]

In 2009, Sullivan appeared on WGN's _The Nick Digilio Show_ to discuss
television and the Emmy nominations of the year on behalf of the site.[9] In
2010, Sullivan announced a new section of their site dedicated to tracking the
availability of programming on digital distribution platforms, to be launched
in August of the same year. He also announced the production of a television
pilot to be released onto the section sometime after its launch; entitled
_.comEDY_ , it was pitched as a comedic look at the effects of the dot-com
bubble burst around Silicon Valley.[2]

