" **The Patchwork Girl** " is the fifth episode of _Pretty Little Liars: The
Perfectionists_.[1] It aired on Freeform on April 17, 2019.[2] In the episode
Alison attempts to get Taylor to return to the city. In addition, "The
Perfectionists" begin to look deeper into Mason, their prime suspect; as their
own relationship begins to fall apart. The episode was written by Joseph
Dougherty and directed by Roger Kumble. It received mostly positive reviews
and was watched live by 0.22 million viewers.

Taylor begins driving the trailer away with Alison still trapped inside. Mona
begins questioning Ray Hogadorn and starts learning things about him. When Ava
has trouble sharpening her pencil she opens it up and finds a note inside with
coordinates. Ava comes up with a plan to drug Mason and pitches it to Caitlin
and Dylan. Mona finds out that Ray was the one who wrote "They're watching" on
Alison's wall.

Alison and Taylor begin talking and Taylor informs her that Mona's program
also finds people who have similar traits. Caitlin tricks Mason into agreeing
to go out to a cabin with her. Alison tells Taylor that she should come back
with her but Taylor tells her that it isn't safe because someone is trying to
kill her. Caitlin also tells Dylan that she is the mole. While Ava is planning
the fashion show she finds a slide in the projector of Dylan having sex. Ava,
Caitlin, and Dylan debate whether drugging Mason is the best way to do things.

Dana questions Mona about her and Alison's past including Alex and Mary Drake.
Alison takes Taylor back to her house which used to be Taylor's. After waiting
an hour in the cabin Ava, Caitlin, and Dylan think Mason isn't coming. Ava and
Dylan leave but Caitlin continues waiting. Mason finally shows up at the cabin
and Caitlin drugs his drink but he refuses to drink it. While Mason is
building a fire Caitlin sneaks up behind him and knocks him out.

Dana stops Ava in the woods and attempts to get Ava to tell her who killed
Nolan. Caitlin and Dylan are waiting to meet Ava but Caitlin is run over by a
car just as Alison finds out that Taylor escaped.

Casting sessions for the episode and the previous episode took place in late
October 2018 between director Roger Kumble, co-executive producer and director
Norman Buckleyas well as executive producer and writer Charlie Craig.[3] Tech
scouting for episodes four and five began on October 31, 2018; meanwhile actor
Niki Koss shadowed both Kumble and Buckley during production of the two
episodes.[4][5] Filming for both episodes took place in November 2018 and
concluded on November 21, 2018.[6][7] Larry Reibman served as the episodes
Director of Photography.[8] A final playback on the episode prior to airing
took place on February 26, 2019.[9]

Noah Grey-Cabey and Klea Scott both reprised their roles for the fourth time
as Mason Gregory and Dana Booker respectively after being cast in recurring
roles for the series.[10][11] Duffy Epstein made his second appearance as a
guest star in this episode after being cast as Ray Hogodorn.[12] Roxanne
Sthathos also made her second appearance as Zoe and received a "co-starring"
credit.[13]

Andrea Reiher with TV Guide stated that the episode "leaned heavily into its
Pretty Little Liars roots".[14] Meanwhile, a reviewer of the episode by the
San Francisco News said "I was seriously ready to check out on the series, but
this episode drew me back in and Iâ€™m hooked again".[15] In addition, Kristen
Perrone's review with Elite Daily says the episode "was a whirlwind of action,
including cabin confrontations, a hit-and-run accident, more emotional
blackmail".[16] The episode debuted on the iTunes US TV Episodes Chart at #20
and has remained on the chart since the episode's airing.[17]

The episode was watched live by 0.22 million viewers and was the lowest rated
episode at the time of the episode's airing.[18][19][20][21][22]

