**Thermal radiation** is electromagnetic radiation generated by the thermal
motion of particles in matter. All matter with a temperature greater than
absolute zero emits thermal radiation. Particle motion results in charge-
acceleration or dipole oscillation which produces electromagnetic radiation.

The infrared radiation emitted by animals that is detectable with an infrared
camera, and the cosmic microwave background radiation, are all examples of
thermal radiation.

If a radiation-emitting object meets the physical characteristics of a black
body in thermodynamic equilibrium, the radiation is called blackbody
radiation.[1] Planck's law describes the spectrum of blackbody radiation,
which depends solely on the object's temperature. Wien's displacement law
determines the most likely frequency of the emitted radiation, and the
Stefan–Boltzmann law gives the radiant intensity.[2]

Thermal radiation is also one of the fundamental mechanisms of heat transfer.

Thermal radiation, also known as heat, is the emission of electromagnetic
waves from all matter that has a temperature greater than absolute zero.[3] It
represents the conversion of thermal energy into electromagnetic energy.
Thermal energy consists of the kinetic energy of random movements of atoms and
molecules in matter. All matter with a temperature by definition is composed
of particles which have kinetic energy, and which interact with each other.
These atoms and molecules are composed of charged particles, i.e., protons and
electrons, and kinetic interactions among matter particles result in charge-
acceleration and dipole-oscillation. This results in the electrodynamic
generation of coupled electric and magnetic fields, resulting in the emission
of photons, radiating energy away from the body through its surface boundary.
Electromagnetic radiation, including light, does not require the presence of
matter to propagate and travels in the vacuum of space infinitely far if
unobstructed.

The characteristics of thermal radiation depend on various properties of the
surface it is emanating from, including its temperature, its spectral
absorptivity and spectral emissive power, as expressed by Kirchhoff's law.[3]
The radiation is not monochromatic, i.e., it does not consist of just a single
frequency, but comprises a continuous dispersion of photon energies, its
characteristic spectrum. If the radiating body and its surface are in
thermodynamic equilibrium and the surface has perfect absorptivity at all
wavelengths, it is characterized as a black body. A black body is also a
perfect emitter. The radiation of such perfect emitters is called black-body
radiation. The ratio of any body's emission relative to that of a black body
is the body's emissivity, so that a black body has an emissivity of unity.

Absorptivity, reflectivity, and emissivity of all bodies are dependent on the
wavelength of the radiation. Due to reciprocity, absorptivity and emissivity
for any particular wavelength are equal – a good absorber is necessarily a
good emitter, and a poor absorber a poor emitter. The temperature determines
the wavelength distribution of the electromagnetic radiation. For example, the
white paint in the diagram to the right is highly reflective to visible light
(reflectivity about 0.80), and so appears white to the human eye due to
reflecting sunlight, which has a peak wavelength of about 0.5 micrometers.
However, its emissivity at a temperature of about −5 °C (23 °F), peak
wavelength of about 12 micrometers, is 0.95. Thus, to thermal radiation it
appears black.

The distribution of power that a black body emits with varying frequency is
described by Planck's law. At any given temperature, there is a frequency _f
max_ at which the power emitted is a maximum. Wien's displacement law, and the
fact that the frequency is inversely proportional to the wavelength, indicates
that the peak frequency _f max_ is proportional to the absolute temperature
_T_ of the black body. The photosphere of the sun, at a temperature of
approximately 6000 K, emits radiation principally in the (humanly) visible
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. Earth's atmosphere is partly
transparent to visible light, and the light reaching the surface is absorbed
or reflected. Earth's surface emits the absorbed radiation, approximating the
behavior of a black body at 300 K with spectral peak at _f max_. At these
lower frequencies, the atmosphere is largely opaque and radiation from Earth's
surface is absorbed or scattered by the atmosphere. Though about 10% of this
radiation escapes into space, most is absorbed and then re-emitted by
atmospheric gases. It is this spectral selectivity of the atmosphere that is
responsible for the planetary greenhouse effect, contributing to global
warming and climate change in general (but also critically contributing to
climate stability when the composition and properties of the atmosphere are
not changing).

The incandescent light bulb has a spectrum overlapping the black body spectra
of the sun and the earth. Some of the photons emitted by a tungsten light bulb
filament at 3000 K are in the visible spectrum. Most of the energy is
associated with photons of longer wavelengths; these do not help a person see,
but still transfer heat to the environment, as can be deduced empirically by
observing an incandescent light bulb. Whenever EM radiation is emitted and
then absorbed, heat is transferred. This principle is used in microwave ovens,
laser cutting, and RF hair removal.

Unlike conductive and convective forms of heat transfer, thermal radiation can
be concentrated in a tiny spot by using reflecting mirrors. Concentrating
solar power takes advantage of this fact. In many such systems, mirrors are
employed to concentrate sunlight into a smaller area. Instead of mirrors,
Fresnel lenses can also be used to concentrate heat flux. (In principle, any
kind of lens can be used, but only the Fresnel lens design is practical for
very large lenses.) Either method can be used to quickly vaporize water into
steam using sunlight. For example, the sunlight reflected from mirrors heats
the PS10 Solar Power Plant, and during the day it can heat water to 285 °C
(558.15 K) or 545 °F.

Lighter colors and also whites and metallic substances absorb less
illuminating light, and thus heat up less; but otherwise color makes small
difference as regards heat transfer between an object at everyday temperatures
and its surroundings, since the dominant emitted wavelengths are nowhere near
the visible spectrum, but rather in the far infrared. Emissivities at those
wavelengths have little to do with visual emissivities (visible colors); in
the far infra-red, most objects have high emissivities. Thus, except in
sunlight, the color of clothing makes little difference as regards warmth;
likewise, paint color of houses makes little difference to warmth except when
the painted part is sunlit.

The main exception to this is shiny metal surfaces, which have low
emissivities both in the visible wavelengths and in the far infrared. Such
surfaces can be used to reduce heat transfer in both directions; an example of
this is the multi-layer insulation used to insulate spacecraft.

Low-emissivity windows in houses are a more complicated technology, since they
must have low emissivity at thermal wavelengths while remaining transparent to
visible light.

Nanostructures with spectrally selective thermal emittance properties offer
numerous technological applications for energy generation and efficiency,[4]
e.g., for cooling photovoltaic cells and buildings. These applications require
high emittance in the frequency range corresponding to the atmospheric
transparency window in 8 to 13 micron wavelength range. A selective emitter
radiating strongly in this range is thus exposed to the clear sky, enabling
the use of the outer space as a very low temperature heat sink.[5]

Personalized cooling technology is another example of an application where
optical spectral selectivity can be beneficial. Conventional personal cooling
is typically achieved through heat conduction and convection. However, the
human body is a very efficient emitter of infrared radiation, which provides
an additional cooling mechanism. Most conventional fabrics are opaque to
infrared radiation and block thermal emission from the body to the
environment. Fabrics for personalized cooling applications have been proposed
that enable infrared transmission to directly pass through clothing, while
being opaque at visible wavelengths. Fabrics that are transparent in the
infrared can radiate body heat at rates that will significantly reduce the
burden on power-hungry air-conditioning systems.[ _citation needed_ ]

There are four main properties that characterize thermal radiation (in the
limit of the far field):

The general properties of thermal radiation as described by the Planck's law
apply if the linear dimension of all parts considered, as well as radii of
curvature of all surfaces are large compared with the wavelength of the ray
considered' (typically from 8-25 micrometres for the emitter at 300 K).
Indeed, thermal radiation as discussed above takes only radiating waves (far-
field, or electromagnetic radiation) into account. A more sophisticated
framework involving electromagnetic theory must be used for smaller distances
from the thermal source or surface (near-field thermal radiation). For
example, although far-field thermal radiation at distances from surfaces of
more than one wavelength is generally not coherent to any extent, near-field
thermal radiation (i.e., radiation at distances of a fraction of various
radiation wavelengths) may exhibit a degree of both temporal and spatial
coherence.[6]

Planck's law of thermal radiation has been challenged in recent decades by
predictions and successful demonstrations of the radiative heat transfer
between objects separated by nanoscale gaps that deviate significantly from
the law predictions. This deviation is especially strong (up to several orders
in magnitude) when the emitter and absorber support surface polariton modes
that can couple through the gap separating cold and hot objects. However, to
take advantage of the surface-polariton-mediated near-field radiative heat
transfer, the two objects need to be separated by ultra-narrow gaps on the
order of microns or even nanometers. This limitation significantly complicates
practical device designs.

Another way to modify the object thermal emission spectrum is by reducing the
dimensionality of the emitter itself.[4] This approach builds upon the concept
of confining electrons in quantum wells, wires and dots, and tailors thermal
emission by engineering confined photon states in two- and three-dimensional
potential traps, including wells, wires, and dots. Such spatial confinement
concentrates photon states and enhances thermal emission at select
frequencies.[7] To achieve the required level of photon confinement, the
dimensions of the radiating objects should be on the order of or below the
thermal wavelength predicted by Planck's law. Most importantly, the emission
spectrum of thermal wells, wires and dots deviates from Planck's law
predictions not only in the near field, but also in the far field, which
significantly expands the range of their applications.

The time to a damage from exposure to radiative heat is a function of the rate
of delivery of the heat.[9] Radiative heat flux and effects:[10] (1 W/cm2 = 10
kW/m2)

Thermal radiation is one of the three principal mechanisms of heat transfer.
It entails the emission of a spectrum of electromagnetic radiation due to an
object's temperature. Other mechanisms are convection and conduction. The
interplay of energy exchange by thermal radiation is characterized by the
following equation:

Here,  α {\displaystyle \alpha \,} ![\\alpha
\\,](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/652e1fd9c3a2ca00e1a517783cdbb0e18e4181f8)
represents the spectral absorption component,  ρ {\displaystyle \rho \,}
![\\rho
\\,](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a1d651c28959a0f15127c097ff4488b123d9e708)
spectral reflection component and  τ {\displaystyle \tau \,} ![\\tau
\\,](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/8661cd2a09f95bb46a58ad86eebc9c7d81a31bea)
the spectral transmission component. These elements are a function of the
wavelength ( λ {\displaystyle \lambda \,} ![\\lambda
\\,](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/988b7b8a22b11081bc97378c30391f573535c21c))
of the electromagnetic radiation. The spectral absorption is equal to the
emissivity ϵ {\displaystyle \epsilon \,} ![\\epsilon
\\,](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/587ec0778f84a86a9567b2e296aec908d895ff21);
this relation is known as Kirchhoff's law of thermal radiation. An object is
called a black body if, for all frequencies, the following formula applies:

In a practical situation and room-temperature setting, humans lose
considerable energy due to thermal radiation in infra-red in addition to that
lost by conduction to air (aided by concurrent convection, or other air
movement like drafts). The heat energy lost is partially regained by absorbing
heat radiation from walls or other surroundings. (Heat gained by conduction
would occur for air temperature higher than body temperature.) Otherwise, body
temperature is maintained from generated heat through internal metabolism.
Human skin has an emissivity of very close to 1.0.[11] Using the formulas
below shows a human, having roughly 2 square meter in surface area, and a
temperature of about 307 K, continuously radiates approximately 1000 watts. If
people are indoors, surrounded by surfaces at 296 K, they receive back about
900 watts from the wall, ceiling, and other surroundings, so the net loss is
only about 100 watts. These heat transfer estimates are highly dependent on
extrinsic variables, such as wearing clothes, i.e. decreasing total thermal
circuit conductivity, therefore reducing total output heat flux. Only truly
_gray_ systems (relative equivalent emissivity/absorptivity and no directional
transmissivity dependence in _all_ control volume bodies considered) can
achieve reasonable steady-state heat flux estimates through the Stefan-
Boltzmann law. Encountering this "ideally calculable" situation is almost
impossible (although common engineering procedures surrender the dependency of
these unknown variables and "assume" this to be the case). Optimistically,
these "gray" approximations will get close to real solutions, as most
divergence from Stefan-Boltzmann solutions is very small (especially in most
STP lab controlled environments).

If objects appear white (reflective in the visual spectrum), they are not
necessarily equally reflective (and thus non-emissive) in the thermal infrared
– see the diagram at the left. Most household radiators are painted white,
which is sensible given that they are not hot enough to radiate any
significant amount of heat, and are not designed as thermal radiators at all –
instead, they are actually convectors, and painting them matt black would make
little difference to their efficacy. Acrylic and urethane based white paints
have 93% blackbody radiation efficiency at room temperature[12] (meaning the
term "black body" does not always correspond to the visually perceived color
of an object). These materials that do not follow the "black color = high
emissivity/absorptivity" caveat will most likely have functional spectral
emissivity/absorptivity dependence.

Calculation of radiative heat transfer between groups of object, including a
'cavity' or 'surroundings' requires solution of a set of simultaneous
equations using the radiosity method. In these calculations, the geometrical
configuration of the problem is distilled to a set of numbers called view
factors, which give the proportion of radiation leaving any given surface that
hits another specific surface. These calculations are important in the fields
of solar thermal energy, boiler and furnace design and raytraced computer
graphics.

A selective surface can be used when energy is being extracted from the sun.
For instance, when a green house is made, most of the roof and walls are made
out of glass. Glass is transparent in the visible (approximately 0.4 µm < λ <
0.8 µm) and near-infrared wavelengths, but opaque to mid- to far-wavelength
infrared (approximately λ > 3 µm).[13][14] Therefore, glass lets in radiation
in the visible range, allowing us to be able to see through it, but does not
let out radiation that is emitted from objects at or close to room
temperature. This traps what we feel as heat. This is known as the greenhouse
effect and can be observed by getting into a car that has been sitting in the
sun.[ _citation needed_ ] Selective surfaces can also be used on solar
collectors. We can find out how much help a selective surface coating is by
looking at the equilibrium temperature of a plate that is being heated through
solar radiation. If the plate is receiving a solar irradiation of 1350 W/m²
(minimum is 1325 W/m² on July 4 and maximum is 1418 W/m² on January 3) from
the sun the temperature of the plate where the radiation leaving is equal to
the radiation being received by the plate is 393 K (248 °F). If the plate has
a selective surface with an emissivity of 0.9 and a cut off wavelength of 2.0
µm, the equilibrium temperature is approximately 1250 K (1790 °F). The
calculations were made neglecting convective heat transfer and neglecting the
solar irradiation absorbed in the clouds/atmosphere for simplicity, the theory
is still the same for an actual problem.

To reduce the heat transfer from a surface, such as a glass window, a clear
reflective film with a low emissivity coating can be placed on the interior of
the surface. “Low-emittance (low-E) coatings are microscopically thin,
virtually invisible, metal or metallic oxide layers deposited on a window or
skylight glazing surface primarily to reduce the U-factor by suppressing
radiative heat flow”.[15] By adding this coating we are limiting the amount of
radiation that leaves the window thus increasing the amount of heat that is
retained inside the window.

Since any electromagnetic radiation, including thermal radiation, conveys
momentum as well as energy, thermal radiation also induces very small forces
on the radiating or absorbing objects. Normally these forces are negligible,
but they must be taken into account when considering spacecraft navigation.
The Pioneer anomaly, where the motion of the craft slightly deviated from that
expected from gravity alone, was eventually tracked down to asymmetric thermal
radiation from the spacecraft. Similarly, the orbits of asteroids are
perturbed since the asteroid absorbs solar radiation on the side facing the
sun, but then re-emits the energy at a different angle as the rotation of the
asteroid carries the warm surface out of the sun's view (the YORP effect).

Thermal radiation power of a black body per unit area of radiating surface per
unit of solid angle and per unit frequency ν {\displaystyle \nu } ![\\nu
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c15bbbb971240cf328aba572178f091684585468)
is given by Planck's law as:

or instead of per unit frequency, per unit wavelength as

This formula mathematically follows from calculation of spectral distribution
of energy in quantized electromagnetic field which is in complete thermal
equilibrium with the radiating object. Plancks law shows that radiative energy
increases with temperature, and explains why the peak of an emission spectrum
shifts to shorter wavelengths at higher temperatures. It can also be found
that energy emitted at shorter wavelengths increases more rapidly with
temperature relative to longer wavelengths.[16] The equation is derived as an
infinite sum over all possible frequencies in a semi-sphere region. The
energy,  E = h ν {\displaystyle E=h\nu } ![E=h\\nu
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c6c0386dc6d9530519404f95570fcc8548ed2326),
of each photon is multiplied by the number of states available at that
frequency, and the probability that each of those states will be occupied.

Integrating the above equation over  ν {\displaystyle \nu } ![\\nu
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c15bbbb971240cf328aba572178f091684585468)
the power output given by the Stefan–Boltzmann law is obtained, as:

where the constant of proportionality σ {\displaystyle \sigma } ![\\sigma
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/59f59b7c3e6fdb1d0365a494b81fb9a696138c36)
is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant and  A {\displaystyle A}
![A](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/7daff47fa58cdfd29dc333def748ff5fa4c923e3)
is the radiating surface area.

The wavelength  λ {\displaystyle \lambda \,} ![\\lambda
\\,](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/988b7b8a22b11081bc97378c30391f573535c21c),
for which the emission intensity is highest, is given by Wien's displacement
law as:

For surfaces which are not black bodies, one has to consider the (generally
frequency dependent) emissivity factor  ϵ ( ν ) {\displaystyle \epsilon (\nu
)} ![\\epsilon \(\\nu
\)](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/20a01b9dad7a79e1c5438527ae3df2a1fe395a0d).
This factor has to be multiplied with the radiation spectrum formula before
integration. If it is taken as a constant, the resulting formula for the power
output can be written in a way that contains  ϵ {\displaystyle \epsilon }
![\\epsilon
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/c3837cad72483d97bcdde49c85d3b7b859fb3fd2)
as a factor:

This type of theoretical model, with frequency-independent emissivity lower
than that of a perfect black body, is often known as a _grey body_. For
frequency-dependent emissivity, the solution for the integrated power depends
on the functional form of the dependence, though in general there is no simple
expression for it. Practically speaking, if the emissivity of the body is
roughly constant around the peak emission wavelength, the gray body model
tends to work fairly well since the weight of the curve around the peak
emission tends to dominate the integral.

Definitions of constants used in the above equations:

Definitions of variables, with example values:

The _net_ radiative heat transfer from one surface to another is the radiation
leaving the first surface for the other minus that arriving from the second
surface.

where  A {\displaystyle A}
![A](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/7daff47fa58cdfd29dc333def748ff5fa4c923e3)
is surface area,  E b {\displaystyle E_{b}} ![{\\displaystyle
E_{b}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/69d2e3ccd9bce33b1ae1562c2e7e831eb8f55bf3)
is energy flux (the rate of emission per unit surface area) and  F 1 → 2
{\displaystyle F_{1\rightarrow 2}} ![F_{{1\\rightarrow
2}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/2ef6c5d8cbda8359fdff44afcad899480f5285f5)
is the view factor from surface 1 to surface 2. Applying both the reciprocity
rule for view factors,  A 1 F 1 → 2 = A 2 F 2 → 1 {\displaystyle
A_{1}F_{1\rightarrow 2}=A_{2}F_{2\rightarrow 1}} ![A_{{1}}F_{{1\\rightarrow
2}}=A_{{2}}F_{{2\\rightarrow
1}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/6f101c105fd6ae94565900cc4d53a0eda3c9887a),
and the Stefan–Boltzmann law,  E b = σ T 4 {\displaystyle E_{b}=\sigma T^{4}}
![{\\displaystyle E_{b}=\\sigma
T^{4}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a5ce5a53779c77876e4eead5be989c3a390bc179),
yields:

where  σ {\displaystyle \sigma } ![\\sigma
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/59f59b7c3e6fdb1d0365a494b81fb9a696138c36)
is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant and  T {\displaystyle T}
![T](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/ec7200acd984a1d3a3d7dc455e262fbe54f7f6e0)
is temperature.[13] A negative value for  Q ˙ {\displaystyle {\dot {Q}}}
![{\\dot
{Q}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/14ef647ca15bb236a9473fcbe17f16fe87c95ab4)
indicates that net radiation heat transfer is from surface 2 to surface 1.

where  ϵ 1 {\displaystyle \epsilon _{1}} ![\\epsilon
_{1}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/f7fcacdbda3738e37cc1f739c4c5739b3482732e)
and  ϵ 2 {\displaystyle \epsilon _{2}} ![\\epsilon
_{2}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/5c7ce0a2b401d02627ae392bfb876b6e765fec7b)
are the emissivities of the surfaces.[13]

Formulas for radiative heat transfer can be derived for more particular or
more elaborate physical arrangements, such as between parallel plates,
concentric spheres and the internal surfaces of a cylinder.[13]

Thermal Infrared Remote Sensing:

