**The Shubert Organization** is a theatrical producing organization and a
major owner of theatres based in Manhattan, New York City. It was founded by
the three Shubert brothers in the late 19th century. They steadily expanded,
owning many theaters in New York and across the country. Since then it has
gone through changes of ownership, but is still a major theater chain.

The Shubert Organization was founded by the Shubert brothers, Sam S. Shubert,
Lee Shubert, and Jacob J. Shubert of Syracuse, New York – colloquially and
collectively known as "The Shuberts" – in the late 19th century in upstate New
York, entering into New York City productions in 1900. The organization
produced a large number of shows and began acquiring theaters. Sam Shubert
died in 1905; by 1916 the two remaining brothers had become powerful theater
moguls with a nationwide presence.

In 1907, the Shuberts tried to enter vaudeville with the United States
Amusement Co. In the spring of 1920 they made another attempt, establishing
the Shubert Advanced Vaudeville with Lee Shubert as President and playing two
shows per day in Boston, Dayton, Detroit, Cleveland, Chicago, Philadelphia and
in September 1921 opening in New York.

In April 1922, the Shuberts teamed with Isidore Herk and E. Thomas Beatty to
form the Affiliated Theatres Corporation, which would book shows for the
chain. Faced with fierce competition from the B. F. Keith Circuit, the
Shuberts closed their vaudeville operation in February 1923.[1]

By 1929, the Shubert Theatre chain included Broadway's most important venues,
the Winter Garden, the Sam S. Shubert, and the Imperial Theaters, and owned,
managed, operated, or booked nearly a thousand theaters nationwide. The
company continued to produce stage productions in New York until the 1940s,
returning to producing Broadway productions in the 1970s after a hiatus.

The company was reorganized in 1973, and as of 2016 owned or operated
seventeen Broadway theaters in New York City, two off-Broadway theaters —
Stage 42 and New World Stages — and the Forrest Theatre in Philadelphia.[2] It
leases Boston's Shubert Theatre to the Citi Performing Arts Center.[3] Shubert
Ticketing, which includes Telecharge, handles tickets for 70 theaters.

Several former Shubert-owned theaters across the United States are still
referred to by the Shubert name. One of the most famous is the New Haven
Shubert, the second theater ever built by the Shubert Organization. Until the
1970s, major Broadway producers often premiered shows there before opening in
New York. It was immortalized in many mid-20th century films, such as _All
About Eve_.

Another important regional theater was the Shubert in Chicago, Illinois,
located within the Majestic Building at 22 West Monroe Street. Originally
known as the Majestic Theatre, the Shubert Organization purchased it in 1945
and rechristened it the "Sam Shubert Theatre". The Shuberts sold the theatre
to the Nederlander Organization in 1991 and is now known as the CIBC Theatre.

In 2016, it sold longtime headquarters at 1700 Broadway, to Ruben Cos for $280
million.[4]

**Notes**

**Further reading**

