The **Timor Leste Defence Force** (Tetum: _Forcas Defesa Timor Lorosae_ ,
Portuguese: _Forças de Defesa de Timor Leste_ or Falintil-FDTL, often
**F-FDTL** ) is the military body responsible for the defence of East Timor.
The F-FDTL was established in February 2001 and comprised two small infantry
battalions, a small naval component and several supporting units.

The F-FDTL's primary role is to protect East Timor from external threats. It
also has an internal security role, which overlaps with that of the Policia
Nacional de Timor Leste (PNTL). This overlap has led to tensions between the
services, which have been exacerbated by poor morale and lack of discipline
within the F-FDTL.

The F-FDTL's problems came to a head in 2006 when almost half the force was
dismissed following protests over discrimination and poor conditions. The
dismissal contributed to a general collapse of both the F-FDTL and PNTL in May
and forced the government to request foreign peacekeepers to restore security.
The F-FDTL is currently being rebuilt with foreign assistance and has drawn up
a long-term force development plan.

The constitution of East Timor assigns the F-FDTL responsibility for
protecting East Timor against external attack. The constitution states that
the F-FDTL "shall guarantee national independence, territorial integrity and
the freedom and security of the populations against any aggression or external
threat, in respect for the constitutional order." The constitution also states
that the F-FDTL "shall be non-partisan and shall owe obedience to the
competent organs of sovereignty in accordance with the Constitution and the
laws, and shall not intervene in political matters." The National Police of
East Timor (or PNTL) and other civilian security forces are assigned
responsibility for internal security.[3] In practice the responsibilities of
the F-FDTL and PNTL were not clearly delineated, and this led to conflict
between the two organisations.[4]

The East Timorese Government has broadened the F-FDTL's role over time. As
what have been designated "new missions", the F-FDTL has been given
responsibility for crisis management, supporting the suppression of civil
disorder, responding to humanitarian crises and facilitating co-operation
between different parts of the government.[5]

The F-FDTL was formed from the national liberation movement guerrilla army
known as FALINTIL (Portuguese acronym for _Forças Armadas de Libertação de
Timor-Leste_ or Armed Forces for the Liberation of East Timor). During the
period before 1999 some East Timorese leaders, including the current President
José Ramos-Horta, proposed that a future East Timorese state would not have a
military. The widespread violence and destruction that followed the
independence referendum in 1999 and the need to provide employment to FALINTIL
veterans led to a change in policy, however.[6] Following the end of
Indonesian rule, FALINTIL proposed the establishment of a large military of
about 5,000 personnel.[7]

In mid-2000 the United Nations Transitional Administration in East Timor
(UNTAET) invited a team from King's College London to conduct a study of East
Timor's security force options. The team's report identified three options for
an East Timorese military. Option 1 was based on FALINTIL's preference for a
relatively large and heavily armed military of 3,000–5,000 personnel, option 2
was a force of 1,500 regulars and 1,500 conscripts and option 3 was for a
force of 1,500 regulars and 1,500 volunteer reservists.[8] The study team
recommended option 3 as being best suited to East Timor's security needs and
economic situation. This recommendation was accepted by UNTAET in September
2000 and formed the basis of East Timor's defence planning.[6][Note 1] The
plan was also accepted by all the countries that had contributed peacekeeping
forces to East Timor.[10] The King's College report has been criticised on the
grounds that it led East Timor to establish a large police force and a large
Army when its security needs may have been better met by a single smaller
paramilitary force.[11]

While East Timor's decision to form a military has been criticised by some
commentators,[12] the East Timorese government has consistently believed that
the force is necessary for political and security reasons. Critics of the
F-FDTL's establishment argue that as East Timor does not face any external
threats the government's limited resources would be better spent on
strengthening the PNTL. While East Timor's political leadership recognises
that the country does not currently face an external threat, they believe that
it is necessary to maintain a military capacity to deter future aggression.
The establishment of the F-FDTL was also seen as an effective means of
integrating FALINTIL into an independent East Timor.[13]

FALINTIL officially became F-FDTL on 1 February 2001. The first 650 members of
the F-FDTL were selected from 1,736 former FALINTIL applicants and began
training on 29 March. The FDTL's 1st Battalion was established on 29 June 2001
and reached full strength on 1 December. Most members of the battalion were
from East Timor's eastern provinces.[14] The 2nd Battalion was established in
2002 from a cadre of the 1st Battalion and was manned mainly by new personnel
under the age of 21 who had not participated in the independence struggle.[15]
Due to the force's prestige and relatively high pay, there were 7,000
applications for the first 267 positions in the battalion.[16] The F-FDTL's
small naval component was established in December 2001.[17] The Australian
UNTAET contingent provided most of the F-FDTL's training, and the United
States equipped the force.[18]

Some of the problems that have affected the F-FDTL throughout its existence
were caused by the process used to establish the force. A key flaw in this
process was that FALINTIL's high command was allowed to select candidates for
the military from members of FALINTIL without external oversight. As a result,
the selection was conducted, to a large degree, on the basis of applicants'
political allegiance. This led to many FALINTIL veterans feeling that they had
been unfairly excluded from the military and reduced the force's public
standing.[19] Furthermore, UNTAET failed to establish adequate foundations for
the East Timorese security sector by developing legislative and planning
documents, administrative support arrangements and mechanisms for the
democratic control of the military. These omissions remained uncorrected after
East Timor achieved independence on 20 May 2002.[20]

The F-FDTL gradually assumed responsibility for East Timor's security from the
UN peacekeeping force. The Lautém District was the first area to pass to the
F-FDTL in July 2002. After further training the F-FDTL took over
responsibility for the entire country's external security on 20 May 2004,
although some foreign peacekeepers remained in East Timor until mid-2005.[21]
The F-FDTL conducted its first operation in January 2003 when an army unit was
called in to quell criminal activity caused by west Timorese militia gangs in
the Ermera district. While the F-FDTL operated in a "relatively disciplined
and orderly fashion" during this operation, it illegally arrested nearly 100
people who were released 10 days later without being charged.[22]

The F-FDTL has suffered from serious morale and disciplinary problems since
its establishment.[23] These problems have been driven by uncertainty over the
F-FDTL's role, poor conditions of service due to limited resources, tensions
arising from FALINTIL's transition from a guerrilla organisation to a regular
military and political and regional rivalries. The F-FDTL's morale and
disciplinary problems have resulted in large numbers of soldiers being
disciplined or dismissed.[24] The East Timorese Government was aware of these
problems before the 2006 crisis but did not rectify the factors that were
contributing to low morale.[25]

Tensions between the F-FDTL and PNTL have also reduced the effectiveness of
East Timor's security services. During 2003 and 2004, members of the police
and F-FDTL clashed on a number of occasions, and groups of soldiers attacked
police stations in September 2003 and December 2004.[25] These tensions were
caused by the overlapping roles of the two security services, differences of
opinion between members of East Timor's leadership and the fact that many
members of the PNTL had served with the Indonesian National Police prior to
East Timor's independence while the F-FDTL was based around FALINTIL.[26] In
2003, the East Timorese Government established three new paramilitary police
forces equipped with modern weapons. The formation of these units led to
dissatisfaction with the Government among some members of the F-FDTL.[26]

The tensions within the F-FDTL came to a head in 2006. In January, 159
soldiers from most units in the F-FDTL complained in a petition to then
President Xanana Gusmão that soldiers from the east of the country received
better treatment than westerners. The 'petitioners' received only a minimal
response and left their barracks three weeks later, leaving their weapons
behind.[28] They were joined by hundreds of other soldiers and on 16 March the
F-FDTL's commander, Brigadier General Taur Matan Ruak, dismissed 594 soldiers,
which was nearly half of the force.[25] The soldiers dismissed were not
limited to the petitioners, and included about 200 officers and other ranks
who had been chronically absent without leave in the months and years before
March 2006.[28]

The crisis escalated into violence in late April. On 24 April, the petitioners
and some of their supporters held a four-day demonstration outside the
Government Palace in Dili calling for the establishment of an independent
commission to address their grievances. Violence broke out on 28 April when
some of the petitioners and gangs of youths who had joined the protest
attacked the Government Palace. The PNTL failed to contain the protest and the
Palace was badly damaged. After violence spread to other areas of Dili, Prime
Minister Mari Alkatiri requested that the F-FDTL help restore order. Troops
with no experience in crowd control were deployed to Dili on 29 April and
three deaths resulted. On 3 May Major Alfredo Reinado, the commander of the
F-FDTL's military police unit, and most of his soldiers including Lt Gastão
Salsinha abandoned their posts in protest at what they saw as the army's
deliberate shooting of civilians.[29]

Fighting broke out between the remnants of the East Timorese security forces
and the rebels and gangs in late May. On 23 May Reinado's rebel group opened
fire on F-FDTL and PNTL personnel in the Fatu Ahi area. On 24 May F-FDTL
personnel near the Force's headquarters were attacked by a group of rebel
police officers, petitioners and armed civilians. The attack was defeated when
one of the F-FDTL naval component's patrol boats fired on the attackers.[30]
During the crisis the relationship between the F-FDTL and PNTL had
deteriorated further, and on 25 May members of the F-FDTL attacked the PNTL's
headquarters, killing nine unarmed police officers.[25]

As a result of the escalating violence the government was forced to appeal for
international peacekeepers on 25 May. Peacekeepers began to arrive in Dili the
next day and eventually restored order. A total of 37 people were killed in
the fighting in April and May and 155,000 fled their homes. A United Nations
inquiry found that the interior and defence ministers and the commander of the
F-FDTL had illegally transferred weapons to civilians during the crisis and
recommended that they be prosecuted.[31]

The 2006 crisis left the F-FDTL "in ruins".[32] The F-FDTL's strength fell
from 1,435 in January 2006 to 715 in September and the proportion of
westerners in the military fell from 65 percent to 28 percent.[20] The F-FDTL
started a rebuilding process with support from several nations and the United
Nations, but was still not ready to resume responsibility for East Timor's
external security two years after the crisis.[32]

In 2004 the commander of the F-FDTL formed a team, which included
international contractors, to develop a long-term strategic vision document
for the military. This study was supported by the Australian Government.[33]
The resulting _Force 2020_ document was completed in 2006 and made public in
2007.[34] The document sets out an 'aspirational' vision for the development
of the F-FDTL to 2020 and beyond and is of equivalent status to a defence
white paper. It proposes expanding the military to a strength of 3,000 regular
personnel in the medium term through the introduction of conscription. It also
sets longer-term goals such as establishing an air component and purchasing
modern weapons, such as anti-armour weapons, armoured personnel carriers and
missile boats, by 2020.[35]

The _Force 2020_ plan is similar to option 1 in the King's College report. The
King's College study team strongly recommended against such a force structure,
labelling it "unaffordable" and raising concerns over the impact of
conscription upon East Timorese society and military readiness. The team
estimated that sustaining such a force structure would cost 2.6 to 3.3 percent
of East Timor's annual gross domestic product and would "represent a heavy
burden on the East Timor economy".[36] Moreover, the _Force 2020_ plan may not
be realistic or suitable as it appears to emphasise military expansion to
counter external threats over spending on other government services and
internal security and outlines ideas such as the long-term (~2075) development
of space forces.[37]

While the _Force 2020_ plan has proven controversial, it appears to have been
adopted by the East Timorese government. The plan was criticised by the United
Nations and the governments of Australia and the United States as unaffordable
and in excess of East Timor's needs.[38] East Timorese President José Ramos-
Horta defended the plan, however, arguing that its adoption will transform the
F-FDTL into a professional force capable of defending East Timor's sovereignty
and contributing to the nation's stability.[39] East Timorese defence
officials have also stressed that _Force 2020_ is a long-term plan and does
not propose acquiring advanced weapons for some years.[34]

The repercussions of the 2006 crisis continue to be felt. On 11 February 2008,
a group of rebels led by Alfredo Reinado attempted to kill or kidnap President
Ramos-Horta and Prime Minister Gusmão. Although Ramos-Horta and one of his
guards were badly wounded, these attacks were not successful and Reinado and
another rebel were killed. A joint F-FDTL and PNTL command was established to
pursue the surviving rebels and the military and police have demonstrated a
high degree of co-operation during this operation.[40] The joint command was
disbanded on 19 June 2008. While the joint command contributed to the
surrender of many of Reinado's associates, it has been alleged that members of
this unit committed human rights violations.[41] In June 2008 the Government
offered to provide financial compensation to the petitioners who wished to
return to civilian life. This offer was accepted, and all the petitioners
returned to their homes by August that year.[42] In May 2009, the F-FDTL
accepted its first intake of recruits since the 2006 crisis. While the
regional diversity of the 579 new recruits was generally much greater than
that of the pre-crisis intakes, 60.3 percent of officer candidates were from
the country's eastern districts.[43] From 2009 the F-FDTL established platoon-
sized outposts to support the PNTL border police in the Bobonaro and Covalima
border districts, and it has increasingly been deployed to undertake internal
security tasks.[12] From February to August 2010, 200 members of the F-FDTL
were deployed to support PNTL operations against "Ninja" gangs. These troops
undertook community engagement tasks, and were unarmed and not closely
integrated with the PNTL efforts.[44]

In 2011 the F-FDTL was still under-strength and yet to reform its training and
discipline standards.[45] Tensions within the F-FDTL also continued to
threaten the stability of the force.[46] However, the East Timorese government
placed a high priority on re-establishing the F-FDTL and developing it into a
force capable of defending the country.[45] In 2012 the Government authorised
an expansion of the F-FDTL to 3,600 personnel by 2020, of whom approximately
one quarter will be members of the Naval Component.[47]

The F-FDTL is still in the process of rebuilding from the events of 2006. The
2016 edition of the International Institute for Strategic Studies' (IISS)
publication _The Military Balance_ stated that the F-FDTL was "only capable of
internal and border-security roles".[1] In 2016 the Australian Defence
Intelligence Organisation also reported that little progress had been made in
implementing the Force 2020 plans.[48]

The constitution of East Timor states that the president is the supreme
commander of the defence force and has the power to appoint the F-FDTL's
commander and chief of staff. The Council of Ministers and National Parliament
are responsible for funding the F-FDTL and setting policy relating to East
Timor's security.[3] Cirilo José Cristovão serves as the current minister of
Defence and Security, and Julio Tomas Pinto is the Secretary of State for
Defense. Both men were sworn into these roles on 8 August 2012.[49] A Superior
Council for Defence and Security was established in 2005 to advise the
president on defence and security policy and legislation and the appointment
and dismissal of senior military personnel. The council is chaired by the
president and includes the prime minister, the defence, justice, interior and
foreign affairs ministers, the heads of the F-FDTL and PNTL a national state
security officer and three representatives from the national parliament. The
council's role is not clear, however, and neither it nor the parliament served
as a check against the decision to sack large numbers of F-FDTL personnel in
2006.[50] A parliamentary committee also provides oversight of East Timor's
security sector.[51] Major General Lere Anan Timor is the current commander of
the F-FDTL, and was appointed to this position on 6 October 2011.[52]

A small ministry of defence (which was renamed the Ministry of Defence and
Security in 2007) was established in 2002 to provide civilian oversight of the
F-FDTL. A lack of suitable staff for the ministry and the close political
relationship between senior F-FDTL officers and government figures rendered
this oversight largely ineffectual and retarded the development of East
Timor's defence policy up to at least 2004.[53] The failure to institute
effective civilian oversight of the F-FDTL also limited the extent to which
foreign countries are willing to provide assistance to the F-FDTL[54] and
contributed to the 2006 crisis.[55] As at early 2010 the Ministry of Defence
and Security was organised into elements responsible for defence (including
the F-FDTL) and security (including the PNTL), each headed by their own
secretary of state. At this time the East Timorese Government was working to
expand the ministry's capacity with assistance from UNMIT, but continuing
shortages of qualified staff limited the extent to which the ministry could
provide civilian oversight to the security sector.[56] Moreover, elements of
the F-FDTL were continuing to resist civilian control over the security forces
at this time, and the force had not opened itself to international
scrutiny.[43]

The F-FDTL is organised into a headquarters, a land component, a naval
component and supporting units. When Taur Matan Ruak moved into politics, the
two most senior officers in the Defence Force became Major General Lere Anan
Timor as CDF and Brigadier General Meno Paixao as Vice Chief of Defence Force.
The supporting units include a logistics support company and a military police
platoon. East Timor does not have an air force and the F-FDTL does not
currently operate any aircraft.[1] Following its establishment the F-FDTL also
had the "largest and most sophisticated" human intelligence network in East
Timor, which was based on the clandestine resistance reporting networks built
up during the Indonesian occupation.[57] However, in May 2008 the national
parliament legislated to place the F-FTDL's intelligence branch under the
authority of the head of the National Information Service.[58]

In 2011 F-FDTL had an authorised strength of 1,500 regular personnel and 1,500
reservists. It had not reached these totals as funding shortfalls prevented
the reserve component from being formed and the Army's two regular battalions
were under-strength.[59] While all the F-FDTL's personnel were initially
FALINTIL veterans the force's composition has changed over time and few
soldiers from the insurgency remain due to the force's narrow age
requirement.[60] After the F-FDTL's 1st Battalion was established in 2001
recruitment was opened to all East Timorese above the age of 18, including
women.[21] Few women have joined the F-FDTL, however, and as at February 2010
only seven percent of new recruits were female.[61][62]

When initially established, the F-FDTL land force comprised two light infantry
battalions, each with an authorised strength of 600 personnel.[63] As of
2004[update] each battalion had three rifle companies, a support company and a
headquarters company.[64] Although the army is small, the guerrilla tactics
employed by FALINTIL before the departure in 1999 of the Indonesian National
Armed Forces were effective against overwhelming numbers and it has the
potential to form a credible deterrent against invasion.[65] The Army's
current doctrine is focused on low-intensity infantry combat tactics as well
as counter-insurgency tasks.[59] Most of the force's training and operations
are conducted at the section level, and company or battalion-sized exercises
are rare.[66]

As of 2016[update] the Army's main elements remained two light infantry
battalions.[1] These units are located in separate bases. As of 2004[update]
the 1st Battalion was based at Baucau, with a contingent in the seaside
coastline village of Laga.[67] In 2006 the 2nd Battalion was stationed at the
Nicolau Lobato Training Centre near Metinaro.[68] Almost all of the 2nd
Battalion's soldiers were dismissed during the 2006 crisis.[20] The 2016
edition of _The Military Balance_ stated that the Army had 1,250 personnel.[1]

Logistics and service support is provided through Headquarters F-FDTL in Dili.
There is also a military police platoon that polices the F-FDTL and performs
traditional policing tasks, resulting in conflicting roles with the PNTL. The
military police have also been responsible for presidential security since
February 2007.[69] In 2010 the United States Embassy in Dili reported that the
F-FDTL also planned to raise two engineer squadrons during that year; these
two units were to have a total strength of 125 personnel.[70]

The F-FDTL is armed only with small arms and does not have any crew-served
weapons. The 2007 edition of _Jane's Sentinel_ stated that the F-FDTL had the
following equipment in service: 1,560 M16 rifles and 75 M203 grenade
launchers, 75 FN Minimi squad automatic weapons, 8 sniper rifles and 50 .45
M1911A1 pistols. A further 75 Minimis were to be ordered at that time. The
majority of the F-FDTL's weapons were donated by other countries.[71] An
assessment of East Timor's security forces published by the Centre for
International Governance Innovation in 2010 stated that "F-FDTL weapons
management and control systems, while superior to that of PNTL, are
underdeveloped".[43]

The naval component of the F-FDTL was established in December 2001 when
Portugal transferred two small _Albatroz_ -class patrol boats from the
Portuguese Navy. Its establishment was not supported by the King's College
study team, the UN, or East Timor's other donor countries on the grounds that
East Timor could not afford to operate a naval force.[17] The role of the
naval component is to conduct fishery and border protection patrols and ensure
that the maritime line of communication to the Oecussi enclave remains open.
All of the force's warships are based at Hera Harbour, which is located a few
kilometres east of Dili.[72] Under the _Force 2020_ plan the naval component
may eventually be expanded to a light patrol force equipped with corvette-
sized ships and landing craft.[73]

On 12 April 2008 East Timor signed a contract for two new Chinese-built
43-metre Type-62 class patrol boats. These ships were to replace the
_Albatroz_ -class vessels and to be used to protect East Timor's fisheries.
The contract for the ships also involved 30 to 40 East Timorese personnel
being trained in China.[74][75] The two new patrol boats arrived from China in
June 2010, and were commissioned as the _Jaco_ -class on the eleventh of the
month.[76][77] In November 2010 it was reported that East Timor would order a
further two patrol boats from South Korea.[78] In the event, three ex-Republic
of Korea Navy Chamsuri class patrol boats were donated, and these entered
service with the naval component on 26 September 2011.[79] The East Timorese
government also ordered two fast patrol boats from the Indonesian company PT
Pal in March 2011 for the price of $US40 million.[80]

The 2016 edition of the IISS _Military Balance_ listed the naval component's
size as 80 personnel.[1] The 2011 edition of _Jane's Sentinel_ put the
strength of the naval component at 250; this source also stated that
recruitment for an approximately 60-person strong marine unit began in 2011
from existing naval component personnel, members of the Army and civilians.
The marines will serve as a special operations force.[81]

In 2017 Timor Leste accepted an offer of two new Guardian-class patrol boats
and associated training and logistics assistance from the Australian
Government. The vessels are scheduled to be delivered in 2023.[82]

**Active**

**Retired**

The military ranks of the F-FDTL are similar to the military ranks of the
Portuguese Armed Forces.[83]

  

  

  

The F-FDTL's budget for 2015 is $US19.9 million.[2] The Ministry of Defence
and Security and Secretariat of State for Defence are funded separately from
the F-FDTL, and were allocated $US4.6 million and $US7.9 million respectively
in 2015.[2] The total expenditure on defence during 2016 was $US27.2 million,
which was equivalent to 0.9 of a percent of gross domestic product.[85]

Most of the F-FDTL's weapons and other equipment have been provided by foreign
donors, and this is likely to remain the case in the future. The East Timor
government has used some of the revenue it earns from the country's oil and
gas sector to purchase military equipment, however.[5] No military production
currently takes place in East Timor.[86]

Funding shortfalls have constrained the development of the F-FDTL. The
government has been forced to postpone plans to form an independent company
stationed in the Oecussi enclave and two reserve infantry battalions. These
units formed an important part of the King's College report's option 3 force
structure and their absence may have impacted on East Timor's defence
policy.[87] As of 2011 the government was yet to announce what, if any,
reserve units would be formed, though provisions for such units had been
included in legislation.[88]

While the UN was reluctant to engage with the F-FDTL, several bilateral donors
have assisted the force's development. Australia has provided extensive
training and logistical support to the F-FDTL since it was established, and
currently provides advisors who are posted to the F-FDTL and Ministry of
Defence and Security. Portugal also provides advisors and trains two naval
officers each year in Portugal. China provided US$1.8 million in aid to the
F-FDTL between 2002 and 2008 and agreed to build a new US$7 million
headquarters for the force in late 2007. East Timor is one of Brazil's main
destinations for aid and the Brazilian Army is responsible for training the
F-FDTL's military police unit (Maubere Mission). The United States also
provides a small amount of assistance to the F-FDTL through the State
Department's International Military Education and Training Program. While
Malaysia has provided training courses and financial and technical aid, this
assistance was suspended after the 2006 crisis.[89] Under current arrangements
Portugal provides the F-FDTL with basic and advanced training while Australia
and other nations provide training in specialised skills.[70] As of
2016[update], the East Timorese government had posted three F-FDTL members to
serve overseas as observers with the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.[1]

East Timor and Indonesia have sought to build friendly relations since 2002.
While movements of people and drug smuggling across their international border
has caused tensions, both countries have worked with the UN to improve the
security situation in the region.[90] The East Timorese and Indonesian
governments signed a defence agreement in August 2011 which aims to improve
co-operation between their national militaries. The Timor Leste-Indonesia
Defense Joint Committee was also established at this time to monitor the
agreement's implementation.[90][91]

East Timor ratified the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, Biological and Toxin
Weapons Convention and Chemical Weapons Convention in 2003. The East Timorese
Government has no plans to acquire nuclear, biological or chemical
weapons.[92] The country also became a party to the Ottawa Treaty, which bans
anti-personnel mines, in 2003.[93]

