The **Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor** ( **TFTR** ) was an experimental tokamak
built at Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) circa 1980 and entering
service in 1982. TFTR was designed with the explicit goal of reaching
scientific breakeven, the point where the heat being released from the fusion
reactions in the plasma is equal or greater than the heating being supplied to
the plasma by external devices to warm it up.[1][2]

The TFTR never achieved this goal, but it did produce major advances in
confinement time and energy density. It was the world's first magnetic fusion
device to perform extensive scientific experiments with plasmas composed of
50/50 deuterium/tritium (D-T), the fuel mix required for practical fusion
power production, and also the first to produce more than 10 MW of fusion
power. It set several records for power output, maximum temperature, and
fusion triple product.

TFTR shut down in 1997 after fifteen years of operation. PPPL used the
knowledge from TFTR to begin studying another approach, the spherical tokamak,
in their National Spherical Torus Experiment. The Japanese JT-60 is very
similar to the TFTR, both tracing their design to key innovations introduced
by Shoichi Yoshikawa during his time at PPPL in the 1970s.

In nuclear fusion, there are two types of reactors stable enough to conduct
fusion: magnetic confinement reactors and inertial confinement reactors. The
former method of fusion seeks to lengthen the time that ions spend close
together in order to fuse them together, while the latter aims to fuse the
ions so fast that they do not have time to move apart. Inertial confinement
reactors, unlike magnetic confinement reactors, use laser fusion and ion-beam
fusion in order to conduct fusion. However, with magnetic confinement reactors
you avoid the problem of having to find a material that can withstand the high
temperatures of nuclear fusion reactions.The heating current is induced by the
changing magnetic fields in central induction coils and exceeds a million
amperes. Magnetic fusion devices keep the hot plasma out of contact with the
walls of its container by keeping it moving in circular or helical paths by
means of the magnetic force on charged particles and by a centripetal force
acting on the moving particles.[3]

By the early 1960s, the fusion power field had grown large enough that the
researchers began organizing semi-annual meetings that rotated around the
various research establishments. In 1968, the now-annual meeting was held in
Novosibirsk, where the Soviet delegation surprised everyone by claiming their
tokamak designs had reached performance levels at least an order of magnitude
better than any other device. The claims were initially met with skepticism,
but when the results were confirmed by a UK team the next year, this huge
advance led to a "virtual stampede" of tokamak construction.[4]

In the US, one of the major approaches being studied up to this point was the
stellarator, whose development was limited almost entirely to the PPPL. Their
latest design, the Model C, had recently gone into operation and demonstrated
performance well below theoretical calculations, far from useful figures. With
the confirmation of the Novosibirsk results, they immediately began converting
the Model C to a tokamak layout, known as the Symmetrical Tokamak (ST). This
was completed in the short time of only eight months, entering service in May
1970. ST's computerized diagnostics allowed it to quickly match the Soviet
results, and from that point, the entire fusion world was increasingly focused
on this design over any other.[5]

During the early 1970s, Shoichi Yoshikawa was looking over the tokamak
concept. He noted that as the size of the reactor's minor axis (the diameter
of the tube) increased compared to its major axis (the diameter of the entire
system) the system became more efficient. An added benefit was that as the
minor axis increased, confinement time improved for the simple reason that it
took longer for the fuel ions to reach the outside of the reactor. This led to
widespread acceptance that designs with lower aspect ratios were a key advance
over earlier models.[2]

This led to the Princeton Large Torus (PLT), which was built in 1973. This
system was successful to the point where it quickly reached the limits of its
ohming heating system, the system that passed current through the plasma to
heat it. Among the many ideas proposed for further heating, in cooperation
with Oak Ridge National Laboratory, PPPL developed the idea of neutral beam
injection. This used small particle accelerators to inject fuel atoms directly
into the plasma, both heating it and providing fresh fuel.[2]

After a number of modifications to the beam injection system, the newly
equipped PLT began setting records and eventually made several test runs at 60
million K, more than enough for a fusion reactor. To reach the Lawson
criterion for ignition, all that was needed was higher plasma density, and
there seemed to be no reason this would not be possible in a larger machine.
There was widespread belief that break-even would be reached during the
1970s.[5][2]

After the success of PLT and other follow-on designs, the basic concept was
considered well understood. PPPL began the design of a much larger successor
to PLT that would demonstrate plasma burning in pulsed operation.[2]

In July 1974, the Department of Energy (DOE) held a large meeting that was
attended by all the major fusion labs. Notable among the attendees was
Marshall Rosenbluth, a theorist who had a habit of studying machines and
finding a variety of new instabilities that would ruin confinement. To
everyone's surprise, at this meeting he failed to raise any new concerns. It
appeared that the path to break-even was clear.[6]

The last step before the attack on break-even would be to make a reactor that
ran on a mixture of deuterium and tritium, as opposed to earlier machines
which ran on deuterium alone. This was because tritium was both radioactive
and easily absorbed in the body, presenting safety issues that made it
expensive to use. It was widely believed that the performance of a machine
running on deuterium along would be basically identical to one running on D-T,
but this assumption needed to be tested. Looking over the designs presented at
the meeting, the DOE team chose the Princeton design.[6]

Bob Hirsch, who recently took over the DOE steering committee, wanted to build
the test machine at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), but others in the
department convinced him it would make more sense to do so at PPPL. They
argued that a Princeton team would be more involved than an ORNL team running
someone else's design. If an engineering prototype of a commercial system
followed, that could be built at Oak Ridge. They gave the project the name
TFTR and went to Congress for funding, which was granted in January 1975.
Conceptual design work was carried out throughout 1975, and detailed design
began the next year.[6]

TFTR would be the largest tokamak in the world; for comparison, the original
ST had a plasma diameter of 12 inches (300 mm), while the follow-on PLT design
was 36 inches (910 mm), and the TFTR was designed to be 86 inches (2,200
mm).[2] This made it roughly double the size of other large-scale machines of
the era; the 1978 Joint European Torus and roughly concurrent JT-60 were both
about half the diameter.[7]

As PLT continued to generate better and better results, in 1978 and 79,
additional funding was added and the design amended to reach the long-sought
goal of "scientific breakeven" when the amount of power produced by the fusion
reactions in the plasma was equal to the amount of power being fed into it to
heat it to operating temperatures. Also known as _Q_ = 1, this is an important
step on the road to useful power-producing designs.[8] To meet this
requirement, the heating system was upgraded to 50 MW, and finally to 80
MW.[9]

Construction began in 1980 and TFTR began initial operations in 1982. A
lengthy period of break-in and testing followed. By the mid-1980s, tests with
deuterium began in earnest in order to understand its performance. In 1986 it
produced the first 'supershots' which produced many fusion neutrons.[10] These
demonstrated that the system could reach the goals of the initial 1976 design;
the performance when running on deuterium was such that if tritium was
introduced it was expected to produce about 3.5 MW of fusion power. Given the
energy in the heating systems, this represented a _Q_ of about 0.2, or about
only 20% of the requirement for break-even.[8]

Further testing revealed significant problems, however. To reach break-even,
the system would have to meet several goals at the same time, a combination of
temperature, pressure and the length of the pulse. In spite of considerable
effort, the system could only demonstrate any one of these goals at a given
time. In April 1986, TFTR experiments produced a fusion triple product of 1.5
x 1014 seconds per cubic centimeter, which is close to the goal for a
practical reactor and five to seven times what is needed for break-even.
However, the temperature was far below what would be required. In July 1986,
TFTR achieved a plasma temperature of 200 million kelvin (200 MK), at that
time the highest ever reached in a laboratory. The temperature is 10 times
greater than the center of the sun, and more than enough for breakeven.
However, to reach these temperatures the triple product had been greatly
reduced to 1013, two or three times too small for break-even.

Major efforts to reach the conditions needed for break-even continued. Donald
Grove, TFTR project manager, said they expected to achieve that goal in 1987.
This would be followed with D-T tests that would actually produce break-even,
beginning in 1989.[11] Unfortunately, the system was unable to meet any of
these goals. The reasons for these problems were intensively studied over the
following years, leading to a new understanding of the instabilities of high-
performance plasmas that had not been seen in smaller machines. A major
outcome of TFTR's troubles was the development of highly non-uniform plasma
cross-sections, notably the D-shaped plasmas that now dominate the field.

Although it became clear that TFTR would not reach break-even, experiments
using tritium began in earnest in December 1993, the first such device to move
primarily to this fuel. In 1994 it produced a then world-record of 10.7
megawatts of fusion power from a 50-50 D-T plasma (exceeded at JET in the UK,
which generated 16MW from 24MW of injected thermal power input in 1997, which
is the current record). The two experiments had emphasized the alpha particles
produced in the deuterium-tritium reactions, which are important for self-
heating of the plasma and an important part of any operational design. In
1995, TFTR attained a world-record temperature of 510 million °C - more than
25 times that at the center of the sun. Also In 1995, TFTR scientists explored
a new fundamental mode of plasma confinement -- enhanced reversed shear, to
reduce plasma turbulence.[12]

TFTR remained in use until 1997. It was dismantled in September 2002, after 15
years of operation.[13]

It was followed by the NSTX spherical tokamak.[14]

  

