**Thomas Cruise**[1] (born **Thomas Cruise Mapother IV** ; July 3, 1962) is an
American actor and film producer. He has received several accolades for his
work, including three Golden Globe Awards and nominations for three Academy
Awards. Cruise is one of the best-paid actors in the world,[2] and his films
have grossed over $4 billion in North America and over $10.1 billion
worldwide,[3] making him one of the highest-grossing box-office stars of all
time.[4]

Cruise began acting in the early 1980s and made his breakthrough with leading
roles in the comedy _Risky Business_ (1983) and the action drama _Top Gun_
(1986). Critical acclaim came with his roles in the dramas _The Color of
Money_ (1986), _Rain Man_ (1988), and _Born on the Fourth of July_ (1989). For
portraying Ron Kovic in the latter, he won a Golden Globe Award and received a
nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. As a leading Hollywood star
in the 1990s, Cruise starred in several commercially successful films,
including the drama _A Few Good Men_ (1992), the thriller _The Firm_ (1993),
the horror film _Interview with the Vampire_ (1994), and the romance _Jerry
Maguire_ (1996), for which he won another Golden Globe and received his second
Oscar nomination. His performance as a motivational speaker in the 1999 drama
_Magnolia_ earned him a third Golden Globe and a nomination for the Academy
Award for Best Supporting Actor. As an action star, Cruise has played Ethan
Hunt in six films of the _Mission: Impossible_ film series from 1996 to 2018.
He also continued to feature in several science fiction and action films,
including _Vanilla Sky_ (2001), _Minority Report_ (2002), _The Last Samurai_
(2003), _Collateral_ (2004), _War of the Worlds_ (2005), _Knight and Day_
(2010), _Jack Reacher_ (2012), _Oblivion_ (2013), and _Edge of Tomorrow_
(2014).

Cruise has been married to actresses Mimi Rogers, Nicole Kidman, and Katie
Holmes. He has three children, two of whom were adopted during his marriage to
Kidman and the other of whom is a biological daughter he had with Holmes.
Cruise is an outspoken advocate for the Church of Scientology and its
associated social programs, and credits it with helping him overcome dyslexia.
In the 2000s, he sparked controversy with his Church-affiliated criticisms of
psychiatry and anti-depressant drugs, his efforts to promote Scientology as a
religion in Europe, and a leaked video interview of him promoting Scientology.

Cruise was born in Syracuse, New York, the son of Mary Lee ( _née_ Pfeiffer)
(1936–2017), a special education teacher, and Thomas Cruise Mapother III
(1934–1984),[5] an electrical engineer, both originally from Louisville,
Kentucky.[6][7] He has three sisters: Lee Anne, Marian, and Cass. They are of
English, German, and Irish ancestry.[8][9] One of Cruise's ancestors, Patrick
Russell Cruise, was born in north County Dublin in 1799; he married Teresa
Johnson in County Meath, in 1825. They left Ireland for the United States that
same year and settled in New York.[8] They had a daughter, Mary Paulina
Russell Cruise, whose son Thomas Cruise Mapother was Cruise's great-
grandfather.[10][11][12][13] A cousin, William Mapother, is also an actor; he
and Cruise have appeared in five films together.[14]

Cruise grew up in near poverty and had a Catholic upbringing. Cruise described
his father as "a merchant of chaos",[15] a "bully", and a "coward" who
inflicted beatings upon him. Regarding his father, Cruise once said, "He was
the kind of person where, if something goes wrong, they kick you. It was a
great lesson in my life—how he'd lull you in, make you feel safe and then,
bang! For me, it was like, 'There's something wrong with this guy. Don't trust
him. Be careful around him.'"[15]

Cruise spent part of his childhood in Canada. His family moved to Beacon Hill,
Ottawa in late 1971 so that Cruise's father could take a position as a defense
consultant with the Canadian Armed Forces.[16] There, Cruise attended the
newly opened Robert Hopkins Public School for much of grade four and grade
five.[16][17] In grade four, Cruise first became involved in drama, under the
tutelage of George Steinburg. Cruise and six other boys put on an improvised
play to music called _IT_ at the Carleton Elementary School drama
festival.[16] Drama organizer Val Wright, who was in the audience that night,
reflected, "The movement and improvisation were excellent. It was a classic
ensemble piece."[16]

In sixth grade, Cruise went to Henry Munro Middle School in Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada. However, in the spring of that year, Cruise's mother left his father,
taking Cruise and his sisters back to the United States;[16] in 1978, she
married Jack South.[18] Cruise's father died of cancer in 1984.[19] Cruise
briefly attended a Franciscan seminary in Cincinnati, Ohio on a church
scholarship and aspired to become a Catholic priest before he became
interested in acting.[20]:24–26 In total, Cruise attended 15 schools in 14
years.[21] In his senior year of high school, he played football for the
varsity team as a linebacker, but was cut from the squad after getting caught
drinking beer before a game.[20]:47 Also in his senior year, Cruise starred in
his high school's production of _Guys and Dolls_.[22] He graduated from Glen
Ridge High School in Glen Ridge, New Jersey in 1980.[23]

At age 18,[24] with the blessing of his mother and stepfather, Cruise moved to
New York City to pursue an acting career.[22] After working as a bus-boy in
New York, Cruise went to Los Angeles to try out for television roles. He
signed with CAA (Creative Artists Agency) and began acting in films.[24]

Cruise first appeared in a bit part in the 1981 film _Endless Love_ , followed
by a major supporting role as a crazed military academy student in _Taps_
later that year. In 1983, Cruise was part of the ensemble cast of _The
Outsiders_. That same year he appeared in _All the Right Moves_ and _Risky
Business_ , which has been described as "A Generation X classic, and a career-
maker for Tom Cruise",[25] and which, along with 1986's _Top Gun_ , cemented
his status as a superstar.[26] Cruise also played the male lead in the Ridley
Scott film _Legend_ , released in 1985.[27]

Cruise followed up _Top Gun_ with _The Color of Money_ , which came out the
same year, and which paired him with Paul Newman. 1988 saw him star in
_Cocktail_ , which earned him a nomination for the Razzie Award for Worst
Actor. Later that year he starred with Dustin Hoffman in _Rain Man_ , which
won the Academy Award for Best Film and Cruise the Kansas City Film Critics
Circle Award for Best Supporting Actor. Cruise portrayed real-life paralyzed
Vietnam War veteran Ron Kovic in 1989's _Born on the Fourth of July_ , which
earned him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture Drama, the
Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor, the People's Choice
Award for Favorite Motion Picture Actor, a nomination for BAFTA Award for Best
Actor in a Leading Role, and Cruise's first Best Actor Academy Award
nomination.

Cruise's next films were _Days of Thunder_ (1990) and _Far and Away_ (1992),
both of which co-starred then-wife Nicole Kidman as his love interest. In
1994, Cruise starred along with Brad Pitt, Antonio Banderas and Christian
Slater in Neil Jordan's _Interview with the Vampire_ , a gothic drama/horror
film that was based on Anne Rice's best-selling novel. The film was well
received, although Rice was initially quite outspoken in her criticism of
Cruise having been cast in the film, as Julian Sands was her first choice.
Upon seeing the film however, she paid $7,740 for a two-page ad in _Daily
Variety_ praising his performance and apologizing for her previous doubts
about him.[28]

In 1996, Cruise appeared as superspy Ethan Hunt in the reboot of _Mission:
Impossible_ , which he produced. It was a box office success, although it
received criticism regarding the Jim Phelps character being a villain despite
being a protagonist of the original television series.[29]

In 1996, he took on the title role in _Jerry Maguire_ , for which he earned a
Golden Globe and his second nomination for an Academy Award. In 1999, Cruise
costarred with Kidman in the erotic Stanley Kubrick film _Eyes Wide Shut_ ,
and took a rare supporting role, as a motivational speaker, Frank T.J. Mackey,
in _Magnolia_ , for which he received another Golden Globe and nomination for
an Academy Award.

In 2000, Cruise returned as Ethan Hunt in the second installment of the
_Mission Impossible_ films, _Mission: Impossible 2_. The film was helmed by
Hong Kong director John Woo and branded with his gun fu style, and continued
the series' blockbuster success at the box office, taking in almost $547M in
worldwide figures. Like its predecessor, it was the highest-grossing film of
the year, and had a mixed critical reception. Cruise received an MTV Movie
Award for Best Male Performance for this film.

His next five films were major critical and commercial successes.[30][31] The
following year Cruise starred in the romantic thriller _Vanilla Sky_ (2001)
with Cameron Diaz and Penélope Cruz. In 2002, Cruise starred in the dystopian
science fiction action film _Minority Report_ which was directed by Steven
Spielberg and based on the science fiction short story by Philip K. Dick.

In 2003, he starred in Edward Zwick's period action drama _The Last Samurai_ ,
for which he received a Golden Globe nomination for best actor. In 2004,
Cruise received critical acclaim for his performance as Vincent in
_Collateral_ \- directed by Michael Mann.

In 2005, Cruise worked again with Steven Spielberg in _War of the Worlds_ , a
loose adaptation of the H. G. Wells novel of the same name, which became the
fourth highest-grossing film of the year with US$591.4 million worldwide. Also
in 2005, he won the People's Choice Award for Favorite Male Movie Star, and
the MTV Generation Award. Cruise was nominated for seven Saturn Awards between
2002 and 2009, winning once. Nine of the ten films he starred in during the
decade made over $100 million at the box office.[30]

In 2006, he returned to his role as Ethan Hunt in the third installment of the
_Mission Impossible_ film series, _Mission: Impossible III_. The film was more
positively received by critics than the previous films in the series, and
grossed nearly $400 million at the box office.[32] In 2007, Cruise took a rare
supporting role for the second time in _Lions for Lambs_ , which was a
commercial disappointment. This was followed by an unrecognizable appearance
as "Les Grossman" in the 2008 comedy _Tropic Thunder_ with Ben Stiller, Jack
Black, and Robert Downey Jr. This performance earned Cruise a Golden Globe
nomination. Cruise played the central role in the historical thriller
_Valkyrie_ released on December 25, 2008 to box office success.[33]

In March 2010, Cruise completed filming the action-comedy _Knight and Day_ ,
in which he re-teamed with former costar Cameron Diaz; the film was released
on June 23, 2010.[34] On February 9, 2010, Cruise confirmed that he would star
in _Mission: Impossible – Ghost Protocol_ , the fourth installment in the
_Mission: Impossible_ series. The film was released in December 2011[35] to
high critical acclaim[36] and box office success.[37] Unadjusted for ticket
price inflation, it is Cruise's biggest commercial success to date.[38]

On May 6, 2011, Cruise was awarded a humanitarian award from the Simon
Wiesenthal Centre and Museum of Tolerance for his work as a dedicated
philanthropist.[39] In mid-2011, Cruise started shooting the movie _Rock of
Ages_ , in which he played the character Stacee Jaxx. The film was released in
June 2012.[40]

Cruise starred as Jack Reacher in the film adaptation of British author Lee
Child's 2005 novel _One Shot._ The film was released on December 21, 2012.[41]
It met with positive reviews from critics and was a box office success
grossing $216,568,266 worldwide.[42][43] In 2013, he starred in the science
fiction film _Oblivion_ based on director Joseph Kosinski's graphic novel of
the same name. The film met with mixed reviews and grossed $285,600,588
worldwide. It also starred Morgan Freeman and Olga Kurylenko.[44][45]

As of mid-2015 Cruise's films have grossed about $8.2 billion worldwide.[46]

Cruise returned as Ethan Hunt in the fifth installment of the _Mission:
Impossible_ series, _Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation_ , which he also
produced.[47] Returning cast members included Simon Pegg as Benji and Jeremy
Renner as William Brandt, with Christopher McQuarrie as director.

Cruise starred in the 2017 reboot of Boris Karloff's 1932 horror movie _The
Mummy_.[48] The new film, also titled _The Mummy_ , was produced by Alex
Kurtzman, Chris Morgan, and Sean Daniel, written by Jon Spaihts and directed
by Kurtzman. In 2018, Cruise again reprised Ethan Hunt, in the sixth film in
his franchise, _Mission: Impossible – Fallout_.

Cruise partnered with his former talent agent Paula Wagner to form
Cruise/Wagner Productions in 1993,[49] and the company has since co-produced
several of Cruise's films, the first being _Mission: Impossible_ in 1996 which
was also Cruise's first project as a producer.

Cruise is noted as having negotiated some of the most lucrative film deals in
Hollywood, and was described in 2005 by Hollywood economist Edward Jay Epstein
as "one of the most powerful – and richest – forces in Hollywood." Epstein
argues that Cruise is one of the few producers (the others being George Lucas,
Steven Spielberg and Jerry Bruckheimer) who are regarded as able to guarantee
the success of a billion-dollar film franchise. Epstein also contends that the
public obsession with Cruise's tabloid controversies obscures full
appreciation of Cruise's exceptional commercial prowess.[50]

Cruise/Wagner Productions, Cruise's film production company, is said to be
developing a screenplay based on Erik Larson's _New York Times_ bestseller,
_The Devil in the White City_ about a real-life serial killer, H. H. Holmes,
at Chicago's World's Columbian Exposition. Kathryn Bigelow is attached to the
project to produce and helm. Meanwhile, Leonardo DiCaprio's production
company, Appian Way, is also developing a film about Holmes and the World's
Fair, in which DiCaprio will star.[51]

Cruise has produced for multiple films in which he has been. He produced
_Mission: Impossible_ , _Without Limits_ , _Mission: Impossible 2_ , _The
Others_ , _Vanilla Sky_ and many others.[52]

On August 22, 2006, Paramount Pictures announced it was ending its 14-year
relationship with Cruise. In the _Wall Street Journal_ , chairman of Viacom
(Paramount's parent company) Sumner Redstone cited the economic damage to
Cruise's value as an actor and producer from his controversial public behavior
and views.[53][54] Cruise/Wagner Productions responded that Paramount's
announcement was a face-saving move after the production company had
successfully sought alternative financing from private equity firms.[55]

Industry analysts such as Edward Jay Epstein commented that the real reason
for the split was most likely Paramount's discontent over Cruise/Wagner's
exceptionally large share of DVD sales from the _Mission: Impossible_
franchise.[56][57]

In November 2006, Cruise and Paula Wagner announced that they had taken over
the film studio United Artists.[49] Cruise acts as a producer and star in
films for United Artists, while Wagner serves as UA's chief executive.

Production began in 2007 of _Valkyrie_ , a thriller based on the July 20, 1944
assassination attempt against Adolf Hitler. The film was acquired in March
2007 by United Artists. On March 21, 2007, Cruise signed to play Claus von
Stauffenberg, the protagonist. This project marked the second production to be
greenlighted since Cruise and Wagner took control of United Artists. The first
was its inaugural film, _Lions for Lambs_ , directed by Robert Redford and
starring Redford, Meryl Streep and Cruise. _Lambs_ was released on November 9,
2007,[58] opening to unimpressive box office revenue and critical reception.

In August 2008, Wagner stepped down from her position at United Artists; she
retains her stake in UA, which combined with Cruise's share amounts to 30
percent of the studio.[59]

Cruise has been married and divorced three times and has three children (two
adopted and one biological).

In the early to mid-1980s, Cruise had relationships with older women,
including Rebecca De Mornay,[60] three years his senior; Patti Scialfa,[61]
nine years his senior; and Cher,[62] 16 years his senior. Cruise married
actress Mimi Rogers on May 9, 1987.[63] They divorced on February 4, 1990.
Rogers introduced Cruise to the Church of Scientology.[64] He met his second
wife, actress Nicole Kidman, on the set of their film _Days of Thunder_
(1990). The couple married on December 24, 1990. Cruise and Kidman adopted two
children, Isabella Jane (born 1992) and Connor Antony (born 1995). In February
2001, Cruise filed for divorce from Kidman while she was unknowingly pregnant.
The pregnancy ended in a miscarriage. In 2007, Kidman clarified rumors of a
miscarriage early in her marriage to Cruise, saying in an interview, "It was
wrongly reported," and explaining that she had actually had an ectopic
pregnancy.[65] Before Kidman's next marriage to Keith Urban, she spoke of how
much she still loved Cruise, saying in 2006: "He was huge; still is. To me, he
was just Tom, but to everybody else, he is huge. But he was lovely to me. And
I loved him. I still love him."[66]

Cruise was next romantically linked with Penélope Cruz, his co-star in
_Vanilla Sky_ (2001). Their relationship ended in 2004.[67]

An article in the October 2012 issue of _Vanity Fair_ states that several
sources have said that after the breakup with Cruz, the Church of Scientology
launched a secret project to find Cruise a new girlfriend. According to those
sources, a series of "auditions" of Scientologist actresses resulted in a
short-lived relationship with British-Iranian actress Nazanin Boniadi, who
subsequently left Scientology.[68] The Church of Scientology and Cruise's
lawyers issued strongly worded denials and threatened to sue, accusing _Vanity
Fair_ of "shoddy journalism" and "religious bigotry."[69] Journalist Roger
Friedman later reported that he received an email from director and ex-
Scientologist Paul Haggis confirming the story.[70][71]

In April 2005, Cruise began dating actress Katie Holmes. On April 27 that
year, Cruise and Holmes – dubbed "TomKat" by the media – made their first
public appearance together in Rome.[72] A month later, Cruise publicly
declared his love for Holmes on _The Oprah Winfrey Show_ , jumping up and down
on Winfrey's couch during the show.[73] On October 6, 2005, Cruise and Holmes
announced they were expecting a child.[74] In April 2006 their daughter Suri
was born.

On November 18, 2006, Holmes and Cruise were married at the 15th-century
Odescalchi Castle in Bracciano, Italy, in a Scientology ceremony attended by
many Hollywood stars.[75][76] The actors' publicist said the couple had
"officialized" their marriage in Los Angeles the day before the Italian
ceremony.[77] There has been widespread speculation that their marriage was
arranged by the Church of Scientology.[78][79] David Miscavige, the head of
the Church of Scientology, served as Cruise's best man.[80]

On June 29, 2012, Holmes filed for divorce from Cruise after five and a half
years of marriage.[81][82] On July 9, 2012, the couple signed a divorce
settlement worked out by their lawyers.[83] Because New York law requires that
all divorce documents remain sealed, the exact terms of the settlement are not
publicly available.[84]

Cruise is an outspoken advocate for the Church of Scientology and its
associated social programs. He became involved with Scientology in 1990
through his first wife, Mimi Rogers.[85] Cruise struggled with dyslexia at an
early age[86] and has said that Scientology, specifically the L. Ron Hubbard
Study Tech, helped him overcome dyslexia.[87]

In addition to promoting various programs that introduce people to
Scientology, Cruise has campaigned for Scientology to be recognized as a
religion in Europe. In 2005, the Paris city council revealed that Cruise had
lobbied officials Nicolas Sarkozy and Jean-Claude Gaudin, described him as a
spokesman and militant for Scientology, and barred any further dealings with
him.[88][89]

Cruise co-founded and raised donations for Downtown Medical to offer New York
City 9/11 rescue workers detoxification therapy based on the works of L. Ron
Hubbard. This drew criticism from the medical profession[90] and from
firefighters.[91]

For such activities, Scientology leader David Miscavige created the
Scientology Freedom Medal of Valor and awarded it to Cruise in late 2004.[92]

In January 2004, Cruise made the controversial statement "I think psychiatry
should be outlawed."[93] Further controversy erupted in 2005 after he openly
criticized actress Brooke Shields for using the drug Paxil (paroxetine), an
anti-depressant to which Shields attributes her recovery from postpartum
depression after the birth of her first daughter in 2003. Cruise asserted that
there is no such thing as a chemical imbalance and that psychiatry is a form
of pseudoscience. Shields responded that Cruise "should stick to saving the
world from aliens and let women who are experiencing postpartum depression
decide what treatment options are best for them".[94] This led to a heated
argument between Matt Lauer and Cruise on NBC's _Today_ on June 24, 2005.[95]

Medical authorities view Cruise's comments as furthering the social stigma of
mental illness.[96][97] Shields herself called Cruise's comments "a disservice
to mothers everywhere."[98] In late August 2006, Cruise apologized in person
to Shields for his comments.[99]

Scientology is well known for its opposition to mainstream psychiatry and the
psychoactive drugs which are routinely prescribed for treatment.[92] It was
reported that Cruise's anti-psychiatry actions led to a rift with director
Steven Spielberg.[100] Spielberg had reportedly mentioned in Cruise's presence
the name of a doctor friend who prescribed psychiatric medication. Shortly
thereafter, the doctor's office was picketed by Scientologists, reportedly
angering Spielberg.[101]

On January 15, 2008, a video produced by the Church of Scientology featuring
an interview with Cruise was posted on YouTube, showing Cruise discussing what
being a Scientologist means to him.[102][103] The Church of Scientology said
the video had been "pirated and edited," and was taken from a three-hour video
produced for members of Scientology.[103][104] YouTube removed the Cruise
video from their site under threat of litigation.[105]

After YouTube investigated this claim, they found that the video did not
breach copyright law, as it is covered by the fair use clause. It was
subsequently reinstated on the site, and as of April 2019, the video has
achieved over 13 million views. YouTube has declined to remove it again, due
to the popularity of the video, and subsequent changes to copyright policy of
the Web site.[106]

In 2013, Cruise stated that ex-wife Katie Holmes divorced him in part to
protect the couple's daughter Suri from Scientology. He also said that Suri is
no longer a practicing member of the church.[107]

In March 2004, his publicist of 14 years, Pat Kingsley, resigned. Cruise's
next publicist was Lee Anne DeVette, Cruise's sister, who was herself a
Scientologist. She served in that role until November 2005.[108] DeVette was
replaced with Paul Bloch from the publicity firm Rogers and Cowan.[109] Such
restructuring was seen as a move to curtail publicity of his views on
Scientology, as well as the controversy surrounding his relationship with
Katie Holmes.[110][111]

The 2015 documentary _Going Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief_ cast
a spotlight on Cruise's role in Scientology. The film alleges that Cruise used
Sea Org workers as a source of free labor.[112] In the film, Cruise's former
auditor Marty Rathbun claims that wife Nicole Kidman was wiretapped on Tom
Cruise's suggestion (which Cruise's lawyer denies).[113][114]

In 2006, _Premiere_ ranked Cruise as Hollywood's most powerful actor,[115] as
Cruise came in at number 13 on the magazine's 2006 Power List, being the
highest ranked actor.[116] The same year, _Forbes_ magazine ranked him as the
world's most powerful celebrity.[117] The founder of CinemaScore in 2016 cited
Cruise and Leonardo DiCaprio as the "two stars, it doesn't matter how bad the
film is, they can pull [the box office] up".[118]

In August 2006, Paramount cited Cruise's "recent conduct" as the reason they
did not renew their production contract with him.[119] In addition, Marketing
Evaluations reported that Cruise's Q score (a measure of the popularity of
celebrities), had fallen 40 percent.[120][121]

October 10, 2006, was declared "Tom Cruise Day" in Japan; the Japan Memorial
Day Association said that he was awarded with a special day because he has
made more trips to Japan than any other Hollywood star.[122]

While reviewing _Days of Thunder_ , film critic Roger Ebert noted the
similarities between several of Cruise's 1980s films and nicknamed the formula
the _Tom Cruise Picture_. Some of Cruise's later films like _A Few Good Men_
and _The Last Samurai_ can also be considered to be part of this formula.

_Widescreenings_ noted that for Tom Cruise's character Daniel Kaffee in _A Few
Good Men_ ,

[screenwriter] Aaron Sorkin interestingly takes the opposite approach of _Top
Gun_ , where Cruise also starred as the protagonist. In _Top Gun_ , Cruise
plays Mitchell who is a 'hot shot' military underachiever who makes mistakes
because he is trying to outperform his late father. Where Maverick Mitchell
needs to rein in the discipline, Daniel Kaffee needs to let it go, finally see
what he can do.[123]

Sorkin and director Rob Reiner are praised in gradually unveiling Kaffee's
potential in the film.[123]

During Cruise's marriage to Nicole Kidman, the couple endured a great deal of
public speculation about their sex life and rumors that Cruise was gay. In
1998, he successfully sued the _Daily Express_ , a British tabloid which
alleged that his marriage to Kidman was a sham designed to cover up his
homosexuality.[124]

In May 2001, he filed a lawsuit against gay porn actor Chad Slater. Slater had
told the celebrity magazine _Actustar_ that he had been involved in an affair
with Cruise. This claim was strongly denied by Cruise,[125] and Slater was
later ordered to pay $10 million to Cruise in damages after Slater declared he
could not afford to defend himself against the suit and would therefore
default. Cruise requested a default judgment and, in January 2003, a Los
Angeles judge decided against Slater after the porn actor said that his story
was false.[126][127]

Cruise also sued _Bold Magazine_ publisher Michael Davis for $100 million,
because Davis had alleged (though never confirmed) that he had video that
would prove Cruise was gay. The suit was dropped in exchange for a public
statement by Davis that the video was not of Cruise, and that Cruise was
heterosexual.[128]

In 2006, Cruise sued cybersquatter Jeff Burgar to obtain control of the
TomCruise.com domain name. When owned by Burgar, the domain redirected to
information about Cruise on Celebrity1000.com. The decision to turn
TomCruise.com over to Cruise was handed down by the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO) on July 5, 2006.[129]

In 2009, Michael Davis Sapir filed a suit charging that his phone had been
wiretapped at Cruise's behest. That suit was dismissed by a Central Civil West
court judge in Los Angeles on the grounds that the statute of limitations had
expired on Sapir's claim.[130][131]

In October 2012, Cruise filed a lawsuit against _In Touch_ and _Life& Style_
magazines for defamation after they claimed Cruise had "abandoned" his six-
year-old daughter.[132] During deposition, Cruise testified that due to his
work load 110 days had passed without him seeing her. The suit was ultimately
settled between the two parties.[133]

