**Tom Ewell** (born **Samuel Yewell Tompkins** , April 29, 1909 – September
12, 1994) was an American film, stage and television actor, and producer.[1]

His most successful and arguably most identifiable role was that of Richard
Sherman in _The Seven Year Itch_ , a role that he originated in the Broadway
stage production (1952–1954) and reprised in the 1955 Hollywood film
adaptation. He received a Tony Award for the play and a Golden Globe Award for
the film. He appeared in several other light comedies of the 1950s, most
notably _The Girl Can't Help It_ (1956), though he preferred the stage.[2]

Ewell was born in Owensboro, Kentucky, the son of Martine (née Yewell) and
Samuel William Tompkins.[3] His family expected him to follow in their
footsteps as lawyers or whiskey and tobacco dealers, but Ewell decided to
pursue acting instead. He began acting in summer stock in 1928 with Don Ameche
before moving to New York City in 1931. He enrolled in the Actors Studio.

He made his Broadway debut in 1934 and his film debut in 1940, and for several
years, he played comic supporting roles. His acting career was interrupted
during World War II when he served in the United States Navy.[4][5]

After World War II, Ewell attracted attention with a strong performance in the
film _Adam's Rib_ (1949), and he began to receive Hollywood roles more
frequently. Ewell continued acting in summer stock through the 1940s: He
starred opposite June Lockhart in Lawrence Riley's biographical play _Kin
Hubbard_ in 1951, the story of one of America's greatest humorists and
cartoonists. With this play, he made his debut as a producer. In 1947, he won
a Clarence Derwent Award for his portrayal of Fred Taylor in the original
Broadway cast of _John Loves Mary_.[2][6]

His most successful and, arguably, most identifiable role came in 1952, when
he joined the Broadway production of _The Seven Year Itch_ as protagonist
Richard Sherman. With Vanessa Brown as "The Girl", Ewell played the part more
than 900 times over three years, as he indicated in a mystery guest appearance
on the June 12, 1955 airing of _What's My Line?_ to promote the 1955 film
adaptation.[2][6] He earned both the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play and
the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for
portraying Sherman.

He enjoyed other film successes, including _The Lieutenant Wore Skirts_ with
Sheree North and _The Girl Can't Help It_ (both 1956) opposite Jayne
Mansfield. In _The Girl Can't Help It_ , Julie London appears as a mirage to
Tom Miller (Ewell) singing her signature song, "Cry Me a River".[6] He played
Abel Frake in the 1962 version of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical _State
Fair_. In 1956, at the Coconut Grove Playhouse, he co-starred with Bert Lahr
in the U.S. premiere of _Waiting for Godot_.

However, as his film and theater careers seemed to have reached their peaks,
he turned his attention to television. Over several years, he played guest
roles in numerous series, and received an Emmy Award nomination for his
continuing role in _Baretta_. In 1982, he co-starred as the drunken town
doctor in the short lived comedy _Best of the West_. His final acting
performance was in a 1986 episode of _Murder, She Wrote_.[6]

From September 1960 to May 1961, Ewell starred in his own television series,
in the self-titled _The Tom Ewell Show_ , which lasted for one season.[6]

In 1970 Ewell appeared as Hoy Valentine in "The Men From Shiloh" (the
rebranded name of _The Virginian_ ) in the episode titled "With Love, Bullets
and Valentines." In the mid-1970s, Ewell enjoyed popular success with a
recurring role as retired veteran policeman Billy Truman in the 1970s Emmy-
winning TV series _Baretta_. Ewell appeared in 36 episodes of the TV-cop
series, which starred Robert Blake as Detective Tony Baretta, until its end in
1978. In 1979, he was a guest star on the TV series _Taxi_. Ewell also co-
starred from 1981 to 1982 in the short-lived TV series _Best of the West_.[6]

On March 18, 1946, he married Ann Abbott, daughter of Broadway director George
Abbott; the short-lived marriage ended in divorce a year later. Ewell then
married Marjorie Sanborn on May 5, 1948; they had a son, Taylor.[ _citation
needed_ ]

On September 12, 1994, Tom Ewell died of undisclosed causes, aged 85, at the
Motion Picture Country House and Hospital in Woodland Hills, California. His
widow, Marjorie, said he had suffered a long series of illnesses. Ewell was
also survived by his son, Taylor, and by his 105-year-old mother, Martine
Yewell Tompkins (1889–1998),[7] who lived in Curdsville, Kentucky, where she
died at age 109.[8]

In 2003, Ewell was inducted into the Owensboro High School Hall of Fame.[
_citation needed_ ]

