The **tonne** (/tʌn/ (![About this
sound](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/Loudspeaker.svg/11px-
Loudspeaker.svg.png)listen); non-SI unit, symbol: **t** ), commonly referred
to as the **metric ton** in the United States and Canada, is a non-SI metric
unit of mass equal to 1,000 kilograms[1][2][3][4] or one **megagram** (symbol:
**Mg** ). It is equivalent to approximately 2,204.6 pounds,[5] 1.102 short
tons (US) or 0.984 long tons (UK). Although not part of the SI, the tonne is
accepted for use with SI units and prefixes by the International Committee for
Weights and Measures.[6]

The tonne is derived from the mass of one cubic metre of pure water; one
thousand litres of pure water has an absolute mass of one tonne.

The SI symbol for the tonne is 't', adopted at the same time as the unit in
1879.[2] Its use is also official for the metric ton in the United States,
having been adopted by the United States National Institute of Standards and
Technology.[7] It is a symbol, not an abbreviation, and should not be followed
by a period. Use of majuscule and minuscule letter case is significant, and
use of other letter combinations is not permitted and would lead to ambiguity.
For example, 'T', 'MT', 'Mt', 'mt' are the SI symbols for the tesla,
megatesla, megatonne (one teragram) and millitonne (one kilogram)
respectively. If describing TNT equivalent units of energy, this is equivalent
to 4.184 petajoules.

In French and most varieties of English (the exceptions being American and
occasionally Canadian English), _tonne_ is the correct spelling. It is usually
pronounced the same as ton /tʌn/, but when it is important to clarify that the
metric term is meant, rather than short ton, the final "e" can also be
pronounced, i.e. "tuhnny" /ˈtʌnɪ/.[8] In Australia, it is also pronounced
/tɒn/.[9]

Before metrication in the UK the unit used for most purposes was the Imperial
ton of 2,240 pounds avoirdupois or 20 hundredweight (usually referred to as
the long ton in the US), equivalent to 1,016 kg, differing by just 1.6% from
the tonne. The UK Weights and Measures Act 1985 explicitly excluded from use
for trade certain imperial units, including the ton, unless the item being
sold or the weighing equipment being used was weighed or certified prior to 1
December 1980, and even then only if the buyer was made aware that the weight
of the item was measured in imperial units.[10][ _full citation needed_
][11][12]

In the United States _metric ton_ is the name for this unit used and
recommended by NIST;[7] an unqualified mention of a _ton_ almost invariably
refers to a short ton of 2,000 pounds (907 kg), and _tonne_ is rarely used in
speech or writing. Both spellings are acceptable in Canadian usage.

_Ton_ and _tonne_ are both derived from a Germanic word in general use in the
North Sea area since the Middle Ages (cf. Old English and Old Frisian _tunne_
, Old High German and Medieval Latin _tunna_ , German and French _tonne_ ) to
designate a large cask, or _tun_.[13] A full tun, standing about a metre high,
could easily weigh a tonne. An English tun (an old wine cask volume
measurement equivalent to nine hundred, and fifty-four litres) of wine has a
relative mass of one tonne, nine hundred, and fifty-four kg if full of pure
water, a little less for wine.

The spelling _tonne_ pre-dates the introduction of the SI in 1960; it has been
used with this meaning in France since 1842,[14] when there were no metric
prefixes for multiples of 106 and above, and is now used as the standard
spelling for the metric mass measurement in most English-speaking
countries.[15][16][17][18] In the United States, the unit was originally
referred to using the French words _millier_ or _tonneau_ ,[19] but these
terms are now obsolete.[3] The Imperial and US customary units comparable to
the tonne are both spelled _ton_ in English, though they differ in mass.

One tonne is equivalent to:

For multiples of the tonne, it is more usual to speak of thousands or millions
of tonnes. Kilotonne, megatonne, and gigatonne are more usually used for the
energy of nuclear explosions and other events in equivalent mass of TNT, often
loosely as approximate figures. When used in this context, there is little
need to distinguish between metric and other tons, and the unit is spelt
either as _ton_ or _tonne_ with the relevant prefix attached.[22]

*The equivalent units columns use the short scale large-number naming system currently used in most English-language countries, e.g. 1 billion = 1,000 million = 1,000,000,000.  
†Values in the equivalent short and long tons columns are rounded to five
significant figures. See Conversions for exact values.  
ǂThough non-standard, the symbol "kt" is also used for knot, a unit of speed
for aircraft and sea-going vessels, and should not be confused with kilotonne.

A **metric ton unit** (mtu) can mean 10 kilograms (22 lb) within metal (e.g.
tungsten, manganese) trading, particularly within the US. It traditionally
referred to a metric ton of ore containing 1% (i.e. 10 kg) of metal.[23][24]
The following excerpt from a mining geology textbook describes its usage in
the particular case of tungsten:

"Tungsten concentrates are usually traded in metric tonne units (originally
designating one tonne of ore containing 1% of WO3, today used to measure WO3
quantities in 10 kg units. One metric tonne unit (mtu) of tungsten (VI)
contains 7.93 kilograms of tungsten." (Walter L Pohl, _Economic Geology:
Principles and Practices_ , English edition, 2011, p 183.)

Note that tungsten is also known as wolfram and has the atomic symbol W.

In the case of uranium, the acronym _MTU_ is sometimes considered to be
_metric ton of uranium_ , meaning 1,000 kg.[25][26][27][28]

A gigatonne is a unit of mass often used by the coal mining industry to assess
and define the extent of a coal reserve.

The _tonne oftrinitrotoluene (TNT)_ is used as a proxy for energy, usually of
explosions (TNT is a common high explosive). Prefixes are used: kiloton(ne),
megaton(ne), gigaton(ne), especially for expressing nuclear weapon yield,
based on a specific combustion energy of TNT of about 4.2 MJ/kg (or one
thermochemical calorie per milligram). Hence, 1 t TNT = 4.2 GJ, 1 kt TNT = 4.2
TJ, 1 Mt TNT = 4.2 PJ.

The SI unit of energy is the joule. Assuming that a TNT explosion releases
1,000 small (thermochemical) calories per gram (4.2 kJ/g), one tonne of TNT is
equivalent to 4.2 gigajoules.

In the petroleum industry the tonne of oil equivalent (toe) is a unit of
energy: the amount of energy released by burning one tonne of crude oil,
approximately 42 GJ. There are several slightly different definitions. This is
ten times as much as a tonne of TNT because atmospheric oxygen is used.

Like the gram and the kilogram, the tonne gave rise to a (now obsolete) force
unit of the same name, the tonne-force, equivalent to about 9.8 kilonewtons: a
unit also often called simply "tonne" or "metric ton" without identifying it
as a unit of force. In contrast to the tonne as a mass unit, the tonne-force
or metric ton-force is not acceptable for use with SI, partly because it is
not an exact multiple of the SI unit of force, the newton.

