**Antonio Nemesio (Sanchez) Taylor** (born December 19, 1935),[1] is a Cuban
former professional baseball second baseman, who played in Major League
Baseball (MLB) for the Chicago Cubs (1958–1960), Philadelphia Phillies
(1960–1971, 1974–1976), and Detroit Tigers (1971–1973). He batted and threw
right-handed. Taylor was inducted into the Philadelphia Phillies Wall of Fame
in 2002.[2]

Taylor posted a career .261 batting average with 75 home runs and 598 RBI in
2195 games.

Taylor signed at age 18 as a third baseman[1] in the New York Giants
organization. He debuted in the major leagues with the Chicago Cubs in 1958;
he was their starting second baseman in 1958 and 1959.[1][3]

Taylor had a small role in one of baseball history's weirdest plays. It took
place on June 30, 1959, when the St. Louis Cardinals played the Cubs at
Wrigley Field. Stan Musial was at the plate facing Bob Anderson with a count
of 3–1. Anderson's next pitch was errant, the ball evaded catcher Sammy Taylor
and rolled all the way to the backstop. Umpire Vic Delmore called "ball four",
but Anderson and Taylor contended that Musial foul tipped the ball. Because
the ball was still in play and Delmore was embroiled in an argument with
Anderson and Taylor, Musial tried to run for second base. Seeing that Musial
was running to second, third baseman Alvin Dark ran to the backstop to
retrieve the ball. The ball wound up in the hands of field announcer Pat
Pieper, but Dark ended up getting it back anyway. Absentmindedly, however,
Delmore pulled out a new baseball and gave it to Taylor. When Anderson noticed
that Musial was trying for second, he took the new ball from Sammy Taylor and
threw it towards Tony Taylor covering second base, and the ball went over
Taylor's head into the outfield. At the same time that Anderson threw the new
ball towards second baseman Taylor, Dark threw the original ball to shortstop
Ernie Banks. Musial did not see the throw and he was declared out when the tag
was made.[4]

Taylor was traded to the Philadelphia Phillies along with Cal Neeman for Don
Cardwell and Ed Bouchee early in the 1960 season.[1] Despite the fact that
Philadelphia was a mediocre team, Taylor established himself and was named to
the National League All-Star team that year.[1]

A solid and dependable performer, Taylor held the record having played in
1,003 games for the Phillies at second base (the record was later broken by
Chase Utley), and his six steals of home, ranks him second on the Phillies'
all-time list.[5]

Taylor was among the first athletes in history to appear on a live satellite
broadcast feed. On July 22, 1962, the first live transatlantic broadcast was
made, relayed by Telstar in the 20 minutes that it orbited over the Atlantic
Ocean. As lead-in filler before a speech by President Kennedy, a 90-second
clip of a televised game between Philadelphia Phillies and the Chicago Cubs at
Wrigley Field, featuring Tony Taylor hitting a ball pitched by Cal Koonce to
right fielder George Altman, was captured and broadcast live to Europe.

In 1963, Taylor hit .281 and collected career highs in runs (102) and hits
(182), and the next season, he made the defensive play that saved Jim
Bunning's perfect game. In 1970, he hit a career-high .301 average with 26
doubles, nine triples and nine homers.

Dealt to the Detroit Tigers in the 1971 midseason, Taylor helped them to a
division title a year later.[1] A free agent before the 1974 season, he signed
again with the Phillies and became a valuable utility man and pinch hitter for
his final three major league seasons.

Following his retirement as a player, Taylor coached for the Phillies and
Marlins.[1] One of the most popular Phillies ever, he was inducted into the
Philadelphia Baseball Wall of Fame in 2002.[2]

Taylor was inducted into the Hispanic Heritage Baseball Museum Hall of Fame on
April 30, 2004 in a pregame ceremony at SBC Park, San Francisco.

