In game theory, **trembling hand perfect equilibrium** is a refinement of Nash
equilibrium due to Reinhard Selten.[1] A trembling hand perfect equilibrium is
an equilibrium that takes the possibility of off-the-equilibrium play into
account by assuming that the players, through a "slip of the hand" or
**tremble,** may choose unintended strategies, albeit with negligible
probability.

First define a **perturbed game**. A perturbed game is a copy of a base game,
with the restriction that only totally mixed strategies are allowed to be
played. A totally mixed strategy is a mixed strategy where _every_ pure
strategy is played with non-zero probability. This is the "trembling hands" of
the players; they sometimes play a different strategy, other than the one they
intended to play. Then define a strategy set S (in a base game) as being
trembling hand perfect if there is a sequence of perturbed games that converge
to the base game in which there is a series of Nash equilibria that converge
to S.

**Note:** All completely mixed Nash equilibria are perfect.

**Note2:** The mixed strategy extension of any finite normal-form game has at
least one perfect equilibrium. [2]

The game represented in the following normal form matrix has two pure strategy
Nash equilibria, namely  ⟨ Up , Left ⟩ {\displaystyle \langle
{\text{Up}},{\text{Left}}\rangle } ![\\langle
{\\text{Up}},{\\text{Left}}\\rangle
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/34000e0409867a10ddf3ab17ddebda1e00b9d1d2)
and  ⟨ Down , Right ⟩ {\displaystyle \langle
{\text{Down}},{\text{Right}}\rangle } ![\\langle
{\\text{Down}},{\\text{Right}}\\rangle
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/bfed20ccd2b77473427489c816f6dd01fdbb138c).
However, only  ⟨ U , L ⟩ {\displaystyle \langle {\text{U}},{\text{L}}\rangle }
![\\langle {\\text{U}},{\\text{L}}\\rangle
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/cd385b80f9680828304e877152a84da031d41e45)
is trembling-hand perfect.

Assume player 1 (the row player) is playing a mixed strategy ( 1 − ε , ε )
{\displaystyle (1-\varepsilon ,\varepsilon )} ![\(1-\\varepsilon ,\\varepsilon
\)](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/3d6ef37a6687082b245cbb4e9e99241eb68c246a),
for  0 < ε < 1 {\displaystyle 0<\varepsilon <1} ![0<\\varepsilon
<1](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a62c0bbc36352f492bde6217430cfe342032487d).

Player 2's expected payoff from playing L is:

Player 2's expected payoff from playing the strategy R is:

For small values of  ε {\displaystyle \varepsilon } ![\\varepsilon
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a30c89172e5b88edbd45d3e2772c7f5e562e5173),
player 2 maximizes his expected payoff by placing a minimal weight on R and
maximal weight on L. By symmetry, player 1 should place a minimal weight on D
if player 2 is playing the mixed strategy  ( 1 − ε , ε ) {\displaystyle
(1-\varepsilon ,\varepsilon )} ![\(1-\\varepsilon ,\\varepsilon
\)](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/3d6ef37a6687082b245cbb4e9e99241eb68c246a).
Hence  ⟨ U , L ⟩ {\displaystyle \langle {\text{U}},{\text{L}}\rangle }
![\\langle {\\text{U}},{\\text{L}}\\rangle
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/cd385b80f9680828304e877152a84da031d41e45)
is trembling-hand perfect.

However, similar analysis fails for the strategy profile  ⟨ D , R ⟩
{\displaystyle \langle {\text{D}},{\text{R}}\rangle } ![\\langle
{\\text{D}},{\\text{R}}\\rangle
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/f91dd178c32d0224136cece589cc71324bb7d1b0).

Assume player 2 is playing a mixed strategy ( ε , 1 − ε ) {\displaystyle
(\varepsilon ,1-\varepsilon )} ![\(\\varepsilon ,1-\\varepsilon
\)](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/dafed2a2c8171e4faaaaf262bc839044173a91cf).
Player 1's expected payoff from playing U is:

Player 1's expected payoff from playing D is:

For all positive values of  ε {\displaystyle \varepsilon } ![\\varepsilon
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/a30c89172e5b88edbd45d3e2772c7f5e562e5173),
player 1 maximizes his expected payoff by placing a minimal weight on D and
maximal weight on U. Hence  ⟨ D , R ⟩ {\displaystyle \langle
{\text{D}},{\text{R}}\rangle } ![\\langle {\\text{D}},{\\text{R}}\\rangle
](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/f91dd178c32d0224136cece589cc71324bb7d1b0)
is not trembling-hand perfect because player 2 (and, by symmetry, player 1)
maximizes his expected payoff by deviating most often to L if there is a small
chance of error in the behavior of player 1.

For 2x2 games, the set of trembling-hand perfect equilibria coincides with the
set of equilibria consisting of two undominated strategies. In the example
above, we see that the equilibrium <Down,Right> is imperfect, as Left (weakly)
dominates Right for Player 2 and Up (weakly) dominates Down for Player 1. [3]

There are two possible ways of extending the definition of trembling hand
perfection to extensive form games.

The notions of normal-form and extensive-form trembling hand perfect
equilibria are incomparable, i.e., an equilibrium of an extensive-form game
may be normal-form trembling hand perfect but not extensive-form trembling
hand perfect and vice versa. As an extreme example of this, Jean-François
Mertens has given an example of a two-player extensive form game where no
extensive-form trembling hand perfect equilibrium is admissible, i.e., the
sets of extensive-form and normal-form trembling hand perfect equilibria for
this game are disjoint.[ _citation needed_ ]

An extensive-form trembling hand perfect equilibrium is also a sequential
equilibrium. A normal-form trembling hand perfect equilibrium of an extensive
form game may be sequential but is not necessarily so. In fact, a normal-form
trembling hand perfect equilibrium does not even have to be subgame perfect.

Myerson (1978)[4] pointed out that perfection is sensitive to the addition of
a strictly dominated strategy. (And instead proposed another refinement, see

