**Tropical Depression Nineteen-E** was a weak and short-lived tropical cyclone
that caused flooding throughout Northwestern Mexico and several states within
the United States in September 2018. Nineteen-E originated from a tropical
wave that left the west coast of Africa on August 29 to 30. It continued
westward, crossed over Central America, and entered the northeastern Pacific
Ocean by September 7. It then meandered to the southwest of Mexico for the
next several days as it interacted with a mid-to-upper level trough. The
National Hurricane Center (NHC) continued to track the disturbance for the
next several days as it traveled northward. A surface trough developed over
the Baja California peninsula on September 18. Despite disorganization and
having close proximity to land, the disturbance developed into a tropical
depression in the Gulf of California on September 19, after having developed a
circulation center and more concentrated convection. The system peaked with
maximum sustained winds of 35 mph (55 km/h) and a minimum central pressure of
1002 mbar (29.59 inHg).

One day after forming, the depression quickly deteriorated and dissipated
after making landfall in Sonora. Overall, the depression affected eleven
Mexican states, with torrential rainfall and flooding ensuing in Baja
California Sur, Sinaloa, and Sonora. Thirteen individuals were killed in
Chihuahua, Sinaloa, and Sonora, and over $40 million USD in agricultural
losses were recorded. Excessive rainfall led to the inundation of at least
300,000 structures in Sinaloa. Flood damage there is estimated to be in the
hundreds of millions (USD). Remnant moisture from Nineteen-E led to severe
flooding within the U.S. states of Arizona, Texas, Oklahoma, and Arkansas and
the death of one person. Damage estimates totaled about $250 million (USD) in
the aforementioned states. Minor damage was also reported in New Mexico.

Tropical Depression Nineteen-E's origins can be traced back to a tropical wave
that departed from the west coast of Africa in between August 29 and 30. On
August 31, it generated Tropical Depression Six, which would later become
Hurricane Florence.[1] The wave continued to track westward at low latitudes,
leaving Florence behind in the far eastern tropical Atlantic Ocean. The wave
eventually moved over Central America and crossed into the far northeastern
Pacific Ocean by September 7. The wave then slowed down and leisurely moved
westward, south of Mexico for the next week or so. Meanwhile, a mid-level
shortwave trough dropped southward from the United States, entering Mexico on
September 9. The trough continued to track southward for the next few days and
a low- to mid-level low developed just south of the southern tip of the Baja
California peninsula on September 12.[1] Around that time, the NHC noted the
system had potential for future tropical development.[2] The low moved
southwestward for the next several days. The trough and a plume of moisture
rushed northward towards the Baja California peninsula just as the tropical
wave was arriving. An area of low pressure formed several hundred miles south
of the southern coast of Mexico on September 14 at 12:00 UTC.[3] A surface
trough with a north-to-south orientation developed over Baja California Sur on
September 18 with thunderstorms having developed from the deep tropics to the
Gulf of California.[4][1]

The disturbance moved into the Gulf of California on September 19.[5] A
circulation center and more concentrated convection formed along the trough.
Despite stronger wind shear and its proximity to land, the disturbance
consolidated into a tropical depression around 12:00 UTC. The genesis of
Nineteen-E was unexpected, having occurred after the NHC had downgraded the
5-day formation chance to low. The NHC stated that Nineteen-E was the first
tropical cyclone to have formed over the Gulf of California based on records
dating back to 1949.[1] Six hours later, the depression's maximum sustained
winds peaked at 35 mph (55 km/h).[1] Around that time, the NHC noted that
banding features had become slightly more defined and an area of strong
convection was present in the eastern semicircle.[6] At 00:00 UTC on September
20, the depression's minimum central pressure decreased to 1002 mbar (29.59
inHg). Around 03:00 UTC, Nineteen-E made landfall between the cities of Ciudad
Obregón and Guaymas in Sonora.[1] After moving ashore, the rugged terrain of
Sonora quickly weakened the depression. Six hours after landfall, the NHC
noted that the depression's convection had taken on a more linear look and
that it had lost its closed surface circulation.[7] The NHC reported that
Nineteen-E dissipated around 12:00 UTC that day.[1] Nineteen-E's remnants
continued to travel northward, while causing severe flooding in Mexico. After
entering the United States, the remnants tracked eastward and drew in moisture
from the Gulf of Mexico, causing flash flooding in several states.[8]

Tropical Depression Nineteen-E caused flooding throughout northwestern Mexico.
In total, at least eleven Mexican states were affected by the depression, with
Baja California Sur, Sonora, and Sinaloa being impacted the hardest.[10]
Torrential rainfall affected the Baja California peninsula for a few days
before genesis occurred on September 19 through the system's dissipation.[11]
The National Meteorological Service of Mexico reported that Baja California
Sur received heavy rainfall, with totals of approximately 3–4 in (70–100 mm)
and an isolated value of up to 4.88 in (124 mm) being reported in the southern
portion of the state.[9] On September 19, in anticipation of hazardous effects
from Nineteen-E, a green alert was issued off-shore of Mexico.[12]

On September 20, the depression made landfall in Sonora, Mexico.[7] The
torrential rains associated with the depression were the most intense to
impact the state in the last decade. According to Conagua, the National Water
Commission, over 8 in (200 mm) of rain fell in a 10-hour period in some
locations.[13][14] At least 13 municipalities in Sinaloa received heavy
rainfall, with a total of 5.5 in (140 mm) being recorded at El Cazanate.[1] In
the municipality of Nogales, more than 300 tonnes of mud, stones, and garbage
were removed from roads in order to make them passable for vehicles.[15]
Additionally, two bodies were recovered by Nogales police after having been
dragged across the border, into Arizona, by strong currents.[16] Over 100
people were rescued from floods and the total number affected is estimated to
be in the hundreds of thousands.[17] Traffic on Federal Highway 15 in southern
Sonora was interrupted as strong water currents flowed across the road.
Authorities used social media to alert the public to stay off the highway.
Additionally, 30 people were rescued from a passenger bus that had gotten
stuck between streams.[18]

In Sinaloa, one person was killed in the community of Goritos where 14.150 in
(359.41 mm) of rain fell.[1][19] In Culiacán, a total of six deaths occurred.
One person drowned after heavy rainfall occurred.[20] Additionally, three
people were counted as missing after being swept away by flood waters and are
presumed dead.[17][10] Two indirect deaths occurred from electrocution.[21]
Classes at all levels of education were cancelled in several municipalities as
a result of the flooding.[18][15] Many roads were damaged, with sinkholes
appearing on Federal Highway 15.[17] More than 16,000 people were evacuated
and 13 shelters were set up due to severe flooding.[21][11] Moreover, a
freight train derailed while traveling from Retes Station to Techa in
Mocorito.[22] Damage to agriculture exceeded 800 million pesos ($41 million
USD) in Sinaloa after 14,000 hectares (35,000 acres) of agricultural fields
and hydro-agricultural infrastructure were inundated.[1] In total, over
500,000 birds and 15,000 heads of cattle, goats, and pigs were killed and
swept away by the currents of engorged rivers. As a result, approximately
58,000 jobs were impacted. Over 300,000 structures were inundated in Sinaloa,
including 160 schools; in the coastal city of Los Mochis, 70,000 buildings
were damaged.[23] Aon estimated the flood damage in Sinaloa to be in the
hundreds of millions (USD).[24]

In the state of Chihuahua, three people were reported dead. A 51-year-old man
and a 45-year-old woman drowned in the municipality of Satevó after being
dragged by strong currents. In Namiquipa, the body of a 45-year-old man was
recovered after he drowned while attempting to cross an engorged
stream.[10][17] Rainfall in the southwestern portion of the state was 2.0–3.9
in (50–99 mm), with a small region reporting up to 7.83 in (199 mm).[9] In
Guanajuato, heavy rainfall forced the reopening of floodgates at the Ignacio
Allende Dam.[18]

Tropical Depression Nineteen-E's remnant moisture also caused flooding in the
U.S. states of Arizona, Texas, Oklahoma, and Arkansas after drawing strength
from the Gulf of Mexico.[8] In those states, damage estimates totaled about
$250 million (USD).[25] Minimal damage was also reported in the state of New
Mexico.[26]

In Arizona, Nineteen-E caused flash flooding at multiple locations on
September 19. Approximately 2–3 in (50–80 mm) of rain fell near Sahuarita,
causing washes of up to 2 ft (0.6 m) that left several individuals stranded in
their vehicles.[27] In Thatcher, 1.5–2.5 in (38–63 mm) of rain fell, causing
two homes to flood. Additionally, multiple roads flooded after a drainage
canal overflowed. Several dorm rooms at Eastern Arizona College flooded, along
with several apartments in the area.[28][29] Near Silverbell, 3 ft (0.9 m) of
water ran over the intersection of two roads.[30] Near Vicksburg, severe rain
caused flash flooding, resulting in road closures near Interstate 10.[31] It
was also reported that 1.56 in (39.6 mm) of rain fell in Tucson,[28] where a
person walking near the Pantano Wash was rescued after being overcome by
rising waters.[29] In New Mexico, it was reported that a large cottonwood tree
blew down near the Kirtland Air Force Base after winds of 50 knots (58 mph; 93
km/h) occurred. Damage was reported at approximately $1,000 (USD).[32] The
National Weather Service stated that no other damage had been reported for New
Mexico. In Albuquerque a peak rainfall total of 1.40 in (35.6 mm) was
reported.[26]

In Texas, Nineteen-E brought torrential rains that caused significant flooding
in many areas. In Everman, a suburb of Fort Worth, water was reportedly up to
6 ft (2 m) deep in places. Over 60 homes were inundated, which forced many
people to evacuate.[33] On September 23, the body of a 23-year-old was
recovered from a creek in Fort Worth.[34] 14 people had to be rescued from
broken-down cars in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.[35] Near Austin, 61 people
from a wedding venue had to be rescued by firefighters. Additionally, the
Shady River RV Resort off of State Highway 29 and near Interstate 35 was
evacuated.[36] In Arlington, a 23-year-old man drowned after being swept off a
bridge. At Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, over 8 in (200 mm) of rain
fell. In Dallas, 15 people, including five police officers, were rescued from
rising waters. Additionally, in Killeen, 34 patients were evacuated from the
Metroplex Hospital after a lightning strike knocked out power to the
facility.[37] Several roads in Nolan,[38] Jones,[39] Tom Green,[40] Uvalde,
Rockwall, Fannin,[35] Sutton, and Schleicher Counties were closed due to
flooding and damage.[41] Near Farmersville, high water along a railway bridge
led to a train derailment. While no one was injured, numerous freight train
cars went off the rails.[35] In Electra, water up to 1 ft (0.3 m) deep was
flowing over multiple city streets.[42] In Knox City, a vehicle stalled after
its driver attempted to drive through flood waters.[43] Additionally, Sonora
was hit with a 25 ft (7.6 m) wall of water after the spillways to several dams
were activated. Water flooded all access points to the town, preventing first
responders from entering. Over 250 homes in the village were either damaged or
destroyed by the flood waters.[44]

In Oklahoma, Nineteen-E caused widespread flooding after dropping large
amounts of rain. The highest recorded rainfall total in far northern Johnston
County was approximately 15.81 in (401.6 mm).[8] In Pontotoc County, four
water rescues were conducted and a state of emergency was declared as rainfall
and flooding associated with Nineteen-E made many roads near the city of Ada
impossible to navigate. In Fittstown and Stonewall, some roads were washed
out.[8] In a 12-hour period, 12.44 in (316.0 mm) of rain fell in Fittstown;
this was the most rainfall recorded in a 12-hour span since the Oklahoma
Mesonet was founded in 1990.[45] In total, 10 roads in the county were closed
due to being washed out; the cost to repair these roads was estimated at
$350,000 (USD).[46] Additionally, roads in several other counties were closed
and/or washed out as a result of severe flooding, including U.S. 77.[47][48]

In Arkansas, Nineteen-E caused flash flooding that resulted in the closure of
several roads. The Northeast Arkansas District Fair in Jonesboro was cancelled
due to the anticipation of severe flooding.[49] Nearly 7 in (200 mm) of rain
fell in Searcy County and White County. The flash flooding that occurred
because of this rainfall closed several roadways. First responders helped to
free vehicles that were stalled in the water and placed barricades in areas
affected by the flooding.[50]

In Mexico, severe flooding in Sonora and Sinaloa prompted the execution of
numerous disaster plans and safety measures. In Sinaloa, the extent and
severity of the flooding was conveyed by the public through the use of social
media platforms.[51] On September 27, the municipalities of Ahome, Culiacán,
Angostura, Badiraguato, Choix, Guasave, El Fuerte, Mocorito, Sinaloa, Salvador
Alvarado, and Navolato were all declared disaster areas by the Government of
Mexico.[52][53] In Culiacán, the Autonomous University of the West and part of
the Autonomous University of Sinaloa were designated as temporary shelters for
people affected by the depression.[13] After the extent of the flooding became
known, the Marine Plan was activated for Baja California, Baja California Sur,
Sonora and Sinaloa to help victims of the floods.[11] Moreover, the Mexican
Army initiated the DN-3 plan for natural disasters and deployed some 2,000
soldiers in Sinaloa and Sonora to aid in relief efforts.[54][51] In Sinaloa,
four aircraft were sent to assist in cleanup efforts, three search and rescue
teams were deployed, and two helicopters were used to transport supplies to
flood victims. Additionally, 17 helicopters were sent to perform
reconnaissance in Sinora and transport supplies.[54] The governor of Sinaloa,
Quirino Ordaz Coppel, encouraged citizens to contribute food, water, and
clothing in order to assist with the relief effort.[19] Several days later,
the National Fund for Natural Disasters (Fonden) was activated to assist local
and regional governments in responding to the flooding.[55] Additionally, the
Macrosimulacro 2018, a nationwide disaster evacuation drill,[56] was suspended
as a precautionary measure in Sonora and Baja California Sur.[57] In the
latter state, safety devices were implemented to prevent people from crossing
swollen streams.[18]

In the United States, severe flooding in Texas resulted in both local and
federal efforts being established in order to provide aid to victims. On
September 28, Governor Greg Abbott issued a disaster declaration for Ellis,
Sutton, Tarrant,[58] Fannin, and Uvalde Counties in response to widespread and
severe property damage caused by the floods.[59] On February 25, 2019,
President Donald Trump declared a number of counties, including the counties
impacted by the remnants of Nineteen-E from September 20–21,[59] a major
disaster area after a series of storms impacted the state from September
through November.[60] In Sutton County, the Bank & Trust and the San Angelo
Area Foundation set up relief funds for Sonora.[61] Additionally, the San
Angelo Health Foundation donated a total of $250,000 (USD) to the Sonora Flood
Relief Fund for flood damage that occurred on September 21. Combined with over
450 other donations and grants, the relief fund reached a total of
approximately $750,000 (USD).[62] Lions Clubs International and other private
organizations and charities also donated supplies and money to the relief
effort. Various state agencies evaluated damage to infrastructure and provided
funding for repairs as well.[63] Moreover, Texas musicians scheduled multiple
concerts in order to raise funds for flood relief in Sonora.[64] A few days
after the floods, American Red Cross representatives arrived to help aid the
recovery efforts.[65] In Tarrant County, it was reported that various relief
organizations were attempting to help with cleanup and recovery efforts within
the Fort Worth suburb of Everman.[66] The city set up a disaster relief
station to provide assistance to displaced residents on September 22.[67]

  
![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/6/62/PD-icon.svg/12px-PD-
icon.svg.png) This article incorporates public domain material from websites
or documents of the National Weather Service.

