**Tropical Storm Alberto** was the first tropical storm of the 2006 Atlantic
hurricane season. Forming on June 10 in the northwestern Caribbean, the storm
moved generally to the north, reaching a maximum intensity of 70 mph (110
km/h) before weakening and moving ashore in the Big Bend area of Florida on
June 13. Alberto then moved through eastern Georgia, North Carolina, and
Virginia as a tropical depression before becoming extratropical on June 14.

Across the Western Caribbean, the storm produced heavy rainfall, causing some
minor damage. In Florida, a moderate storm tide caused coastal damage and
flooding, while Alberto's outer rainbands produced several tornadoes. The
storm was indirectly responsible for two drownings off the coast of Tampa Bay.
In North Carolina, heavy rainfall caused locally severe flooding, and one
child drowned in a flooded storm drain near Raleigh. The remnants of Alberto
produced strong winds and left four people missing in Atlantic Canada.
Overall, damage was minor along Alberto's path.

In early June 2006, an area of convection persisted across Central America and
the western Caribbean in association with a broad, nearly stationary trough of
low pressure.[1][2] Thunderstorms increased and became more concentrated on
June 8 after a tropical wave moved into the western Caribbean,[1] and an
upper-level low to its west increased outflow over the system.[3] The
disturbance moved slowly north-northwestward, and development was initially
inhibited by marginally favorable upper-level winds and land interaction.[4]
The system gradually organized,[5] and by June 10 a circulation formed with
sufficiently organized convection for the National Hurricane Center to
classify it Tropical Depression One. At this point the storm was located about
140 miles (225 km) south of the western tip of Cuba.[1]

The depression tracked to the northwest through the Yucatán Channel into an
area of increased wind shear, which left the center exposed and
elongated.[1][6] Despite its poor structure, the system maintained strong
winds in its eastern semicircle. The depression intensified into Tropical
Storm Alberto early on June 11 about 260 miles (420 km) southwest of the Dry
Tortugas, based on Hurricane Hunters' reports of flight level winds of 50 mph
(80 km/h) in a few convective bands.[1] Upon becoming a tropical storm, the
low-level circulation had become better defined, though forecasts predicted
the wind shear would increase, preventing significant strengthening of the
storm.[7] One forecaster at the National Hurricane Center remarked the system
resembled a subtropical cyclone.[8] However, deep convection developed and
built westward against the wind shear as the overall organization improved. At
the same time Alberto turned northeastward under the influence of an
approaching trough.[9] On June 12, the circulation abruptly reformed under the
area of deepest convection, which coincided with the storm's passage over the
loop current; consequentially, Alberto quickly strengthened to reach peak
winds of 70 mph (115 km/h) about 220 miles (350 km) west-northwest of Tampa,
Florida.[1]

Though it was projected to track over cooler waters and stay in an area of
increased shear, forecasters at the National Hurricane Center predicted
Alberto would attain hurricane status and make landfall at that intensity.[10]
The storm maintained peak intensity for about 18 hours,[1] and while
accelerating northeastward, Alberto's convection diminished as the cloud
pattern became elongated.[11] On June 13, dry air became entrained in the
circulation, leaving the center exposed from the convection and the wind field
greatly broadened.[12] A partial eyewall developed in the western semicircle
of the center; however, winds were well below hurricane force.[13] Alberto
continued to weaken, and made landfall at about 1630 UTC on June 13 with 45
mph (75 km/h) winds in Taylor County, Florida, about 50 miles (80 km)
southeast of Tallahassee.[1]

The storm maintained a well-organized structure[14] and banding features over
land,[15] while continuing to produce winds of tropical storm force as it
moved into Georgia. Early on June 14, the storm weakened to tropical
depression status while located near the city of Millen, Georgia. Alberto
began to lose tropical characteristics soon thereafter, and about six hours
after weakening to a tropical depression it transitioned into an extratropical
cyclone.[1] Late on June 14 it accelerated northeastward to emerge into the
Atlantic Ocean,[16] and on June 15, it entered the area of responsibility of
the Canadian Hurricane Centre.[17] While over open waters, Alberto's remnants
began to re-intensify; later that day, the extratropical remnant low attained
winds of 65 mph (105 km/h) and a pressure of 969 mbar while a short distance
south of Nova Scotia.[1] At this time, the low presented a well-defined comma
structure.[18] After passing near Sable Island,[18] the remnants of Alberto
crossed the Avalon Peninsula of Newfoundland on June 16.[19] The extratropical
storm turned to the east-northeast and later to the east as it continued its
rapid forward motion, and on June 19 the remnants of Alberto merged with an
approaching cold front near the British Isles.[1]

By June 12, the Cuban government had evacuated over 25,000 people in the
western portion of the country due to the threat of flooding.[20][21] The
National Hurricane Center recommended tropical storm warnings for the Isle of
Youth and the Pinar del Río Province early on June 10, but they were not
issued by the Cuban government.[22]

In northwestern Florida, officials issued a mandatory evacuation order a day
before the storm moved ashore for about 21,000 citizens in Levy County, Citrus
County, and Taylor County.[23] Several schools were closed as well, and
converted into shelters.[24] In all, about 350 coastal residents took refuge
in emergency shelters.[25] Prior to the arrival of the storm, Florida governor
Jeb Bush declared a state of emergency for the state.[26] A tropical storm
watch was first issued for portions of the Florida Panhandle about 43 hours
prior to landfall. As Alberto was predicted to continue intensifying, the
National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane warning from Longboat Key to the
mouth of the Ochlockonee River approximately 25 hours before landfall. A
tropical storm warning extended southward to Englewood and westward to Indian
Pass. A tropical storm warning was also issued from Flagler Beach, Florida to
the mouth of the Santee River in South Carolina.[1] As the storm moved inland,
local National Weather Service offices issued flood watches for portions of
North Carolina, Virginia, and the Delmarva Peninsula. Additionally, flood and
flash flood warnings were issued for some portions of the country from South
Carolina through Virginia.[16]

While Alberto was becoming extratropical over land, the Canadian Hurricane
Centre issued gale warnings for offshore waters of Nova Scotia,[27] and later
for Newfoundland. In addition, the Atlantic Storm Prediction Center issued
inland wind warnings for coastal regions of Nova Scotia.[28] Due to the
prediction for precipitation, the Atlantic Storm Prediction Center posted
rainfall warnings for all Atlantic coastal regions of Nova Scotia.[29]

In its early stages of development, the tropical depression which later became
Alberto produced heavy rainfall across the western Caribbean. A station on
Grand Cayman reported 22.72 inches (577 mm) of rain in one 24-hour period.[22]
In Cuba, rainfall amounted to 17.52 inches (445 mm) in Pinar del Río
province,[1] where one station recorded 4.06 inches (103 mm) in one hour.[20]
On the Isle of Youth, precipitation accrued to 15.67 inches (398 mm) in
Sumidero.[1] Air and marine travel was disrupted between the Cuban mainland
and the Isle of Youth.[21] In Havana Province rainfall totaled 8.46 inches
(215 mm) at Playa Baracoa.[1] Much of the precipitation fell during a fairly
short time, and was beneficial, as the area had been suffering from severe
drought conditions.[30] In Pinar del Río province, the precipitation flooded
50 sq mi (130 km2) of crop land. The storm damaged about 50 houses across the
country, about half of which in Havana.[20]

Alberto dropped light amounts of rainfall across Mexico, with a 24-hour total
peaking at 4 inches (100 mm) in Peto, Yucatán. Light rain was also reported
throughout Quintana Roo and in eastern Campeche.[31]

The large area of convection associated with Alberto dropped rainfall across
Florida for several days. The statewide precipitation maximum reached 7.08
inches (180 mm) at a station 5 miles (8 km) east of Tarpon Springs.[32] The
highest sustained winds from the storm were officially clocked at 40 mph (65
km/h) in St. Petersburg, which also saw reports of wind gusts of up to 56 mph
(90 km/h). Upon making landfall on the Florida Panhandle, the storm produced a
storm tide which unofficially peaked at 7.3 feet (2.2 m) at Crystal River
Power Plant.[1] The combination of high surf and the storm tide caused surge
flooding along the Florida Panhandle.[33] Six tornadoes were spawned in the
state from the outer rainbands of Alberto, none of which caused serious
damage.[25][34]

Across coastal areas, the storm surge flooding caused minor damage to dozens
of homes and closed several roads. Near Homosassa, two people who did not
evacuate required water rescue. At Egmont Key State Park, a woman fell off of
a boat when a band of showers and surging currents made navigation difficult;
her husband and a friend drowned after jumping in to save her without life
jackets, though the woman returned safely to the boat.[25] The rainfall caused
some temporary road flooding, though precipitation was mostly beneficial in
alleviating drought conditions. Moderate wind gusts caused scattered power
outages and downed some trees across the northeast portion of the state.[34]
Overall, property damage in the state rose to about $390,000 (2006 USD) in
total.[25][35]

While the storm moved through the state of Georgia, moderate winds of up to 45
mph (72 km/h) occurred along the coastline.[1] Rainfall ranged from 3–5 inches
(75–125 mm) across the southeast portion of the state,[36] with isolated
higher maxima of up to 7.05 inches (179 mm) in Rincon.[16] Alberto produced a
storm tide of 8.53 feet (2.6 m) at Fort Pulaski National Monument, causing
some beach erosion along the coastline.[37]

Alberto produced winds of tropical storm force along the South Carolina
coastline; the highest official wind gust was 51 mph (82 km/h) at Edisto
Beach.[1] The storm dropped precipitation across much of the state, including
a state maximum of 4.42 inches (112 mm) at Pritchardville. Storm tides reached
7.81 feet (2.4 m) above the mean low-level water mark along Fripp Island,
leading to some beach erosion along portions of the coastline. While in the
process of becoming extratropical, the rainbands of Alberto spawned seven
confirmed tornadoes in the state, most of which rated F0;[1] a National
Weather Service report indicated additional tornadoes may have occurred in the
state. The tornadoes caused some minor damage, though overall damage in the
state was minimal.[37]

The remnants of Alberto dropped heavy precipitation across North Carolina,
including a nationwide high of 7.16 inches (182 mm) at the Raleigh National
Weather Service Office.[3] Some totals broke previous rainfall records,[38]
including the station at Raleigh-Durham International Airport which broke the
all-time daily precipitation record for that station. The rainfall led to
flooding across the central portion of the state, with 45 flash flood warnings
issued by the Raleigh National Weather Service. Police and firefighters in
Wake County performed 47 water rescues. Additionally, the Raleigh-Wake 9-1-1
center received more than 1,076 calls for help. Flash flooding occurred
throughout the area, which caused the Crabtree Creek in Raleigh to crest at
23.77 feet (7.2 m);[39] this was the second highest flood stage on record for
the creek. The overflown creek flooded a few cars to their rooftops, and
resulted in the closure of the Crabtree Valley Mall. Major flooding was
reported elsewhere throughout the region, which closed several roads and
damaged some houses.[40] In Franklin County, an eight-year-old boy drowned
after getting sucked into a flooded drainage system; the death is considered
indirect because the boy was chasing a ball into the drainage system.[1] Near
the coast, the storm produced several waterspouts, some of which moved ashore
in Dare and Carteret counties. Isolated reports of 60 mph (95 km/h) wind gusts
resulted in downed trees and minor damage.[41]

Rainfall from the storm extended into Virginia, the Eastern Shore of Maryland,
and extreme southeastern Delaware.[3] Precipitation totaled 5.8 inches (147
mm) in Virginia Beach,[42] which caused flash flooding in the Hampton Roads
area. The flooding closed several roads, though no major damage was
reported.[43]

The extratropical remnant of Alberto produced strong winds across the Canadian
Maritimes, including gusts of 74 mph (119 km/h) in the Municipality of the
District of Barrington of Nova Scotia.[18] Sustained winds reached 51 mph (83
km/h).[17] Rainfall from the storm was moderate, with some locations reporting
0.4 inches (10 mm) per hour;[44] totals exceeded 2 inches (50 mm) in numerous
areas. Due to wet grounds, the winds knocked down some trees and several tree
limbs, and also downed some power lines,[18] causing localized power
outages.[17] Moderate winds and rainfall affected Newfoundland, as well.[19]
According to a press report, the storm left four sailors missing about 230
miles (370 km) south of Nova Scotia.[1]

