**Tropical Storm Barry** was a strong tropical storm that made landfall on the
Florida Panhandle during August 2001. The third tropical cyclone and second
named storm of the 2001 Atlantic hurricane season, Barry developed from a
tropical wave that moved off the coast of Africa on July 24. The wave entered
the Caribbean on July 29 and spawned a low-pressure area, which organized into
Tropical Storm Barry on August 3. After fluctuations in intensity and track,
the storm attained peak winds of 70 mph (110 km/h) over the Gulf of Mexico.
Barry headed northward and moved ashore along the Gulf Coast before
dissipating on August 7.

Unlike the devastating Tropical Storm Allison earlier in the season, Barry's
effects were moderate. Nine deaths occurred: six in Cuba and three in Florida.
As a tropical cyclone, Barry produced heavy rainfall that peaked at 8.9 in
(230 mm) at Tallahassee. Gusts in the area reached 79 mph (127 km/h), which
was the highest wind speed recording for the storm. The precursor tropical
wave to Barry dropped large amounts of rain on southern Florida, leading to
significant flooding and structural damage. Moderate flooding and wind damage
occurred throughout the Florida Panhandle. As the storm's remnants tracked
inland, parts of the Mississippi Valley received light precipitation. Barry
caused an estimated $30 million (2001 USD) in damage.

On July 24, 2001, a tropical wave emerged off the west coast of Africa, and
tracked westward across the Atlantic Ocean. Little cyclonic development
occurred until July 28, when convection began to increase along the wave. The
wave moved into the eastern Caribbean on July 29, and its convection continued
to increase while it tracked west-northwest over the subsequent few days. The
disturbance emerged into the Gulf of Mexico on August 1, with rainfall noted
over southern Florida and the western tip of Cuba. That same day, a broad low-
pressure system developed along the wave near the Dry Tortugas at the end of
the Florida Keys, which began to intensify as it moved northwestward. At
around 1800 UTC on August 2, an Air Force Reserve Hurricane Hunter aircraft
investigating the system discovered that the low had organized into a tropical
storm, which received the name _Barry_. Post-hurricane season reanalysis,
however, revealed that the low had become a tropical depression six hours
earlier. There is uncertainty as to whether Barry actually held tropical
characteristics at the time of designation, because of an upper-level low that
was situated over the cyclone's surface center.[1]

When Barry became a tropical cyclone, its convection wrapped around roughly
half of the center. Outflow in the eastern semicircle was good, although due
to upper-level wind shear, it was restricted to southeast of the
circulation.[2] The cyclone became embedded within a mid- to-upper-level
trough between the ridge over the central U.S. and the ridge over the
northwestern Caribbean. A strong, upper-level cyclonic shear axis extended
from just south of Cape Hatteras to near Brownsville, Texas, which prevented
Barry from accelerating in forward speed.[3] The ridge over the United States
weakened, thus collapsing the steering pattern; this resulted in a west-
southwestward drifting motion of the tropical storm by around August 3.[1]
Early on August 3, strong westerly winds prevailed, and separated the center
of circulation from what limited convection remained.[4] The storm quickly
regained some convection, although maximum sustained winds remained weak, at
about 40 mph (60 km/h).[5] Despite a slight drop in barometric pressure, post-
season analysis revealed Barry weakened into a tropical depression early on
August 4 due to the persistent wind shear and falling external pressure.[1]

At 1800 UTC on August 4, the cyclone re-intensified slightly, and was upgraded
to a tropical storm[1] as the shear decreased.[6] Early on August 5, a
strengthening period began as deep convection ignited over and near the low-
level center.[7] Prior to landfall, banding features developed on the eastern
half of the circulation, despite some residual westerly shear.[8] Within seven
hours, the barometric pressure dropped from 1004 mb to 990 mb and overall
satellite presentation had begun to improve. Barry reached its peak intensity
at 1800 UTC on August 5 with winds of 70 mph (110 km/h), just shy of hurricane
status.[1] An eye formed at around the same time. At 0500 UTC on August 6,
Barry increased in forward speed and made landfall at Santa Rosa Beach,
Florida with winds of 70 mph (110 km/h).[9] Moving inland, the system weakened
rapidly to a tropical depression; the National Hurricane Center issued its
last advisory on the storm early on August 6.[10] By the evening hours,
maximum sustained winds near the center were around 5 mph (8.0 km/h) to 10 mph
(16 km/h) as the system slowed significantly and drifted northwest at about 7
mph (11 km/h).[11] The depression turned northwestward, and steadily weakened
to a remnant low near Memphis, Tennessee on August 7, and the low dissipated
on August 8 over southeastern Missouri.[1]

In advance of the storm, the National Hurricane Center issued tropical storm
watches and warnings for much of the U.S. Gulf Coast. They were upgraded to a
hurricane warning when the storm was predicted to reach hurricane intensity.
Because that strengthening failed to occur, the hurricane warning was
downgraded to a tropical storm warning shortly before landfall. Westward, the
warnings for Louisiana and Mississippi were discontinued. After Tropical Storm
Barry made landfall, all tropical storm warnings for the Florida Panhandle
were discontinued.[1] Flood warnings were issued for parts of Leon and Wakulla
counties, while a flash flood watch was in effect for parts of southern
Georgia.[11] A tornado watch was issued for the eastern Florida Panhandle,
southern Georgia, as well as portions of central and eastern Alabama.[12]

As Barry approached the Florida Panhandle, voluntary evacuations took place in
eight counties.[13] Shelters opened in six counties, though most were placed
on standby. In parts of Franklin County, mandatory evacuations were ordered,
and in Okaloosa County, tolls on the Mid-Bay Bridge were suspended.[14] Forty
C-130 cargo aircraft and about 300 personnel from Hurlburt Field were moved to
the Little Rock Air Force Base in Arkansas to flee the storm's projected path.
In Tallahassee, county officials filled sandbags in areas vulnerable to
flooding.[13] At Grand Isle State Park, park rangers moved picnic tables out
of tidal range and closed the camping grounds for a period of time.[15]
Additionally, the storm forced NASA to delay a shuttle launch in southern
Florida. Elsewhere, thousands of personnel were evacuated from several
offshore oil platforms.[16] The city of New Orleans closed 60 of its 72
floodgates to avoid possible flooding.[17] Throughout southeastern Louisiana,
including New Orleans, roughly 500 Red Cross volunteers and staff members were
on standby.[16] The threat of the storm forced the cancellation of an 'N Sync
concert at Pro Player Stadium.[18]

The precursor tropical wave to Barry dropped widespread rainfall in western
Cuba, but no damage was reported. Offshore, high seas sank a Cuban refugee
boat, drowning 6 of its 28 passengers.[1]

Three people in Florida were killed by the storm, and total damage is
estimated at around 30 million (2001 USD).[19] In southern Florida, the
precursor to Barry produced 3 in (75 mm) to 8 in (200 mm), with rainfall
peaking at 13 in (330 mm). The rain helped relieve persistent drought
conditions;[1] however, it caused significant flooding in Martin County on
August 2, where a total of 300 homes received water damage. About 63
structures and 6 mobile homes in the county sustained major damage.[20] In the
Treasure Coast, catfish reportedly swam through flooded streets.[21] Winds
downed a 60 ft (18 m) radio tower, striking a house.[22]

Due to the initial slow movement of the storm, outer rainbands began affecting
the Florida Panhandle on August 4, with the heaviest rainfall observed on
August 5â€“6. The storm dropped 5 in (125 mm) to 9 in (225 mm); the highest
official report was 8.9 in (230 mm) at Tallahassee, though unofficial reports
ranged as high as 11 in (175 mm).[1] The rainfall inundated several structures
in Bay County due to roof damage. Flooding occurred in Leon County and parts
of Apalachicola National Forest, where torrential rains flowed into the
Cascade Lakes, Lake Bradford and Munson Slough; the Munson Slough rose to its
highest level since 1994. Numerous county and secondary roads were closed by
floodwater in Walton, Washington, and Bay counties,[19] as well as in the
Tallahassee area.[23] In and around Tallahassee, 100 vehicles were stalled by
flood waters and towed, while four residents of an apartment complex on Allen
Road were forced to evacuate due to rising waters.[24] Sporadic flooding also
occurred in Franklin County and Wakulla County.[25] An indirect death occurred
from a traffic accident due to heavy rain in Jackson County.[1]

Wind gusts peaked at 79 mph (127 km/h) at the Eglin Air Force Base Range
Station C-72.[1] Light to moderate winds were widespread, causing damage
throughout Walton, Washington, Bay, Calhoun, Gulf and Okaloosa counties.[26]
Trees were downed or damaged, and several structures suffered light wind
damage.[27] Window damage was reported at a high-rise condominium building in
Destin, while nearby, the Mid-Bay Bridge was closed due to high winds.[28] The
Freeport Elementary School in Walton County sustained minor roof
damage.[23][29] Storm surge was generally light, ranging from 2 ft (0.61 m) to
3 ft (0.91 m), with only minor beach erosion as a result.[26] As a tropical
system, Barry spawned a few weak tornadoes that caused minor damage. In an
outer rain band, a lightning strike in Jacksonville killed one person. Another
death is blamed on a rip current off of Sanibel Island.[1] In total, the storm
left 34,000 customers in the state without power.[28]

Tropical Storm Barry dropped light to moderate rainfall across Alabama,
peaking at 4.57 in (116 mm) near the town of Evergreen.[30] About 2 in (50 mm)
fell over the state's peanut-growing region, helping to alleviate drought
conditions.[31] Heavy showers were also reported in the Birmingham area.[32]
Despite moderate rainfall totals inland, coastal locations received very
little precipitation.[33] Minor street flooding occurred in Geneva, Enterprise
and New Brockton.[34] Wind gusts peaked at 39 mph (63 km/h) at Montgomery,[35]
although damage was light, mostly from downed trees. Damage to awnings and
small structures was reported in Florala.[36] Barry's remnants produced light
rainfall across Mississippi and Georgia, though no damage was reported. As the
storm continued to track inland, it dropped up to 3 in (75 mm) of rain
throughout Arkansas, Missouri and western Tennessee.[11]

