**TVB Pearl** (Chinese: 無綫電視明珠台) is one of the two free television services in
Hong Kong that mainly broadcast in the English language, the other being ATV
World and later ViuTVsix. It is owned and operated by Television Broadcasts
Limited, and together with its sister Cantonese language station TVB Jade, is
broadcast from TVB City at 77 Chun Choi Street in Tseung Kwan O Industrial
Estate in Tseung Kwan O, in the Sai Kung District, which is in the Eastern
region of Hong Kong's New Territories.

Apart from the use of English rather than Cantonese, TVB Pearl's daytime
output differs from TVB Jade's in providing more serious programming, such as
documentaries and news, and during peak viewing time it is much more reliant
on overseas-made TV series and films. Occasionally, TVB Pearl also shows
programmes in other languages (but usually well outside peak viewing time),
including Mandarin, Japanese and Korean (see #Non-English programmes).

Established on 19 November 1967, TVB Pearl broadcasts free of charge to over
2.1 million households in Hong Kong. The channel is operated by Television
Broadcasts Limited or TVB, along with its sister channel TVB Jade. In 1991,
TVB Pearl began to broadcast in NICAM, a digital audio modulation system that
provides a facility for stereo or bilingual or trilingual audio transmission.
(For the digital counterpart, multiple AC-3 streams are transmitted for the
same purpose.) With a compatible television, the viewer can receive audio in
their choice of language; typically, English and Cantonese. Chinese subtitles
are available on most programmes after 18:20.

The transmission of TVB Pearl digital TV channel have been upgraded from SDTV
to HDTV video format on 28 October 2012 at 02:50.

Movies are the most watched programmes on TVB Pearl. The generic title for
movies on the channel was originally _Studio 930_ , during the late 1980s and
the 1990s as the starting time was 9.30pm every weekday. This was later
replaced by _Weekend Blockbuster_ when movies were no longer shown during the
9:30pm time slot from Mondays to Thursdays. This title is familiar to most
Hong Kong viewers, according to ratings surveys conducted by ACNielsen in
2001. While most drama programmes air over four nights (Monday-Thursdays),
_Weekend Blockbuster_ generally airs on Fridays and over the weekend.

The channel produces themed collections of programmes during some special
occasions. For example, the collection _Be My Valentine_ (featuring a series
of love movies) is released a week before Valentine's Day, horror movies are
shown at Halloween and fantasy movies are shown at Christmas.

Other programmes broadcast include:

TVB Pearl started producing a new programme known as "Dolce Vita" from the
spring of 2006. _Dolce Vita_ is a topical lifestyle magazine programme that
focuses on current events in Hong Kong, including new restaurants and
interviews with visiting English-speaking celebrities.

As a free TV broadcasting channel, TVB Pearl is important in introducing drama
produced outside Hong Kong to the populace. This includes such award-winning
drama series as _Lost_ , _Without a Trace_ , _Nip/Tuck_ , _The O.C._ , _24_ ,
_Las Vegas_ , and _Medium_. The success of these shows prompted the production
of Hong Kong versions of _ER_ ( _Healing Hands_ ), _Desperate Housewives_ (
_La Femme Desperado_ ) and _Sex and the City_ ( _20/30 Dictionary_ ).
Moreover, the ratings on the debut of the Japanese Drama _Mother at 14_ have
been the highest ratings recorded for drama on the channel in the last 20
years.

Since the Hong Kong government does not have its own television station, its
agency Radio Television Hong Kong (RTHK) requires the two domestic free
television stations to broadcast their programmes and advertisements. One of
the most well known programmes is _Educational Television_ (ETV) which began
in 1971. This follows the Hong Kong education syllabus, serving as a reference
for primary and secondary school students of mathematics, the English
language, Putonghua, and other school subjects. During the thirty-two week
school year, ETV programmes are shown on ATV World from 09:00 to 12:00 and on
TVB Pearl from 14:00 to 16:00 each weekday.

Other programmes produced by RTHK are broadcast on TVB Pearl on a weekly
basis. These programmes are mainly documentaries covering politics and social
issues, such as _A Week in Politics_ and _Hong Kong Connection_.

Both ATV World and TVB Pearl are permitted by the Broadcasting Authority of
Hong Kong to broadcast non-English programmes for up to 20% of their daily
transmission time, outside peak viewing time. In fact, only 12% of TVB Pearl
programmes are in languages other than English: 83.6% of those (10% of its
total transmission time) are in Mandarin. The remainder include broadcasts in
Japanese, Korean, Filipino and Cantonese.

Schedules are published in the _South China Morning Post_ , _The Standard_ ,
_The Manila Times_ , _Manila Bulletin_ , _The Freeman_ , _Mindanao Times_ ,
_The Mindanao Daily Mirror_ , _Bohol Chronicle_ , _Sun.Star Cebu_ ,
_Philippine Daily Inquirer_ , _The Philippine Star_ , _The Standard_ and
_Bicol Standard_ and in other daily Hong Kong and Philippine newspapers,
including Chinese newspapers.

TVB Pearl operates its own official homepage which contains information about
the programmes shown by the channel. In addition to schedules, this includes
featured special collections, highlights of some movies, and "editor's
choice". A discussion area called Pearl Club, where audience members may post
their opinions about the programmes of TVB Pearl, is also available;
membership is free. Viewers can also register to receive programme information
via email, through the "Pearl e-alert" service.

Since the 2002/2003 academic year, TVB Pearl has been in partnership with
SCOLAR (The Standing Committee on Language Education and Research) in a pilot
project to promote language education in Hong Kong. TVB Pearl will continue to
be one of the partner stations of SCOLAR in launching the "English in the Air
2003/04" project, aiming at promoting the learning and teaching of English
through television programmes for secondary school students and teachers. Two
teenage English television programmes entitled _Road Scholars_ and _Lizzie
McGuire_ are to be broadcast on TVB Pearl in accordance with the project.
English subtitles will be provided to facilitate the learning of English.

Television Broadcast Limited cooperated with ABC Asia Pacific (now called
Australia Plus), operated by the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC), to
provide a broadcast of ABC National news every morning after midnight on TVB
Pearl. This partnership ended on 17 June 2006.

TVB Pearl is broadcast through UHF from its six main transmission stations at
Temple Hill, Golden Hill, Castle Peak, Kowloon Peak, Tai Mo Shan, and Lamma
Island, and two repeaters at Tsuen Wan and Tsing Yi. The Tsuen Wan repeater
started service on 22 August 2003, and the Tsing Yi repeater started on 18
September 2003. The repeaters were built to enhance reception of TVB Pearl.

**Censorship in the People's Republic of China** (PRC) is implemented or
mandated by the PRC's ruling party, the Communist Party of China (CPC).
However, the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region has its own English
Common Law system and is largely self-governing, so the censorship policy is
not implemented in Hong Kong.[2]

TVB Pearl is re-broadcast in Guangdong Province by **Southern Television**
(南方电视台), the state-owned and operated television network in the Province. Due
to the media censorship in China, TVB Pearl is not always available in some
parts of the Province. For example, in some cities (like Shaoguan), during
those times that the scheduled programme's nature is deemed to be "sensitive",
the local TV provider replaces the programme with pre-taped documentary or
travel shows.

TVB Pearl is re-broadcast in the city of Guangzhou by **Guangzhou Television**
(广州电视台, GZTV), the state-owned & operated TV network in Guangzhou. In addition
to using advertising to replace censored Hong Kong programmes, GZTV also
broadcasts adverts during the hours that TVB Pearl is off the air.

TVB Pearl has received a number of awards during the years of its programming
production. For example, _The Pearl Report: Outsider_ won a merit at the [Hong
Kong Human Rights Press Awards]Human Rights Press Awards 2002 co-organised by
the Foreign Correspondents' Club, Amnesty International Hong Kong and the Hong
Kong Journalists Association Meanwhile, _2008 Olympic Image_ was awarded the
Bronze Medal (Station and Image Production) in the New York Festivals.

