_**The Walking Dead**_ is an American post-apocalyptic horror television
series for AMC based on the comic book series by Robert Kirkman, Tony Moore,
and Charlie Adlard. The series features a large ensemble cast as survivors of
a zombie apocalypse, trying to stay alive under near-constant threat of
attacks from the mindless zombies, colloquially known as "walkers". However,
with the fall of humanity, these survivors also face conflict from other
living survivors who have formed groups and communities with their own sets of
laws and morals, often leading to hostile conflict between the human
communities. Andrew Lincoln played the series' lead character, Rick Grimes,
until his departure during the ninth season. Other long-standing cast members
have included Norman Reedus, Steven Yeun, Chandler Riggs, Melissa McBride,
Lauren Cohan, and Danai Gurira.

The series is exclusively broadcast on AMC in the United States and
internationally on Fox International Channels prior to the 2019 Disney-Fox
merger, and then subsequently on Disney Channels Worldwide. The series
premiered on October 31, 2010. In February 2019, AMC renewed the series for a
tenth season, which is scheduled to premiere on October 6, 2019, and stated
their intent to continue further development of the series and related media.
A spinoff series _Fear the Walking Dead_ first broadcast on August 23, 2015,
and is renewed for a sixth season. AMC has announced plans for three films to
follow Rick's story after Lincoln's departure.

_The Walking Dead_ is produced by AMC Studios within the state of Georgia,
with most filming taking place in the large outdoor spaces of Riverwood
Studios near Senoia, Georgia. The series was adapted from the comic by Frank
Darabont, who also served as the showrunner for the first season. However,
conflicts between Darabont and AMC forced his departure from the series, and
which is currently subject to multiple lawsuits by Darabont and others.
Following Darabont, Glen Mazzara, Scott M. Gimple, and Angela Kang have all
served as showrunners.

Beginning with its third season, _The Walking Dead_ has attracted the most 18-
to 49-year-old viewers of any cable or broadcast television series, though
viewership has declined in later seasons. The series has been well received by
critics, although reception has declined as the series has progressed.[3] It
has been nominated for several awards, including the Writers Guild of America
Award for New Series and the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series â€“
Drama.[4][5]

_The Walking Dead_ takes place after the onset of a worldwide zombie
apocalypse. The zombies, colloquially referred to as "walkers", shamble
towards living humans and other creatures to eat them; they are attracted to
noise, such as gunshots, and to different scents, e.g. humans. Although it
initially seems that only humans that are bitten or scratched by walkers can
turn into other walkers, it is revealed early in the series that all living
humans carry the pathogen responsible for the mutation. The mutation is
activated after the death of the pathogen's host, and the only way to
permanently kill a walker is to damage its brain or destroy the body, such as
by cremating it.

The series centers on sheriff's deputy Rick Grimes, who wakes up from a coma.
While in a coma, the world has been taken over by "zombies." He becomes the
leader of a group of survivors from the Atlanta, Georgia, region as they
attempt to sustain and protect themselves not only against attacks by walkers
but by other groups of survivors willing to use any means necessary to stay
alive.

Sheriff's deputy Rick Grimes wakes from a coma discovering a world overrun by
zombies. After befriending Morgan Jones, Rick travels alone to Atlanta to find
his wife Lori, his son, Carl, and his police partner and best friend, Shane
Walsh, encountering other survivors. The group travels to the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC), but find from the sole remaining CDC member that no
cure exists for the epidemic.[6][7]

Traveling from Atlanta, Rick's group takes shelter at Hershel Greene's farm
while they search for Carol's missing daughter, Sophia. Tension between the
survivors worsen after it is discovered that Hershel has kept friends and
family turned into zombies, including Sophia, in his barn. Rick learns that
Shane and Lori were romantically involved at the outset of the apocalypse, and
Shane and Rick's friendship becomes increasingly unhinged when Lori reveals
that she is pregnant. Rick is eventually forced to kill Shane in self-defense.
The noise draws zombies, forcing Rick's group and Hershel's surviving family
to evacuate the farm.[8]

Eight months after fleeing Hershel's farm, Rick's group finds a prison, which
they clear of zombies to make their new home. Lori dies in childbirth, and
Rick becomes withdrawn. Meanwhile, Andrea is rescued by Michonne and the two
discover Woodbury, a fortified town led by a man known as the Governor. He
learns of Rick's group at the prison, leading to conflict between them. Rick's
group eventually raids and destroys Woodbury, but the Governor ultimately has
Andrea killed and escapes. Woodbury's citizens live with Rick's group at the
prison.[9]

Several months after the Governor's attack, a deadly flu kills many of the
people at the prison. The Governor finds his former right-hand men and kills
them, taking over their group and destroys the prison. Rick's group are forced
to separate and flee, but not before Hershel and the Governor are killed. The
survivors divide, face their own trials and meet new faces before finding
signs pointing to a safe haven called Terminus. One by one, they reunite at
Terminus, but all the group are captured for some unknown purpose.[10]

Rick discovers the residents of Terminus engage in cannibalism, but the group
overwhelms Terminus and reunite. Some are injured and kidnapped to Grady, a
hospital run by corrupt cops and doctors. When the survivors recover, they are
approached by Aaron, inviting them to join a fortified community called
Alexandria led by Deanna Monroe. They are initially welcomed, but Rick's group
realize the residents have not faced the zombie threat directly. Rick
romanticizes with a woman called Jessie Anderson. He discovers her husband is
abusive, killing him during a conflict with Deanna's permission. Morgan
unexpectedly arrives, witnessing Rick's execution.[11]

The residents of Alexandria put more trust in Rick's group to protect the town
better. A group known as the Wolves use a zombie horde to attack Alexandria,
with many lives lost including Deanna and the entire Anderson family. While
recovering, Alexandria learns of a community called the Hilltop, who offer to
help trade supplies if they can end the threat of the extortionist Saviors led
by a man named Negan. Although Rick's group decimate one Savior outpost, they
are later caught by Negan, and forced to swear loyalty to him.

Negan brutally murders Glenn and Abraham, instigating his rule over
Alexandria. His actions initially lead Rick to submit, but Michonne persuades
him to fight back. They encounter a community called the Scavengers for help.
Carol and Morgan befriend King Ezekiel, the leader of the Kingdom, while
Maggie and Sasha rally the Hilltop. Rosita and Eugene make a bullet to kill
Negan. When the bullet is blocked by Lucille, Negan's bat, Negan forcefully
recruits Eugene as a Savior. The Saviors and turncoat Scavengers attack
Alexandria but are repelled by Sasha's sacrifice and the aid of Kingdom and
Hilltop soldiers.

Rick, Maggie, and Ezekiel rally their communities into war against Negan and
the Saviors. Losses are heavy on both sides and many of the Kingdom's soldiers
are killed. Alexandria falls to a Savior attack, and Carl is bitten by a
walker. Before euthanizing himself, Carl convinces Rick to end the war and
restart society anew. Negan attempts to wipe out Rick and his allies in a
final battle, but Eugene thwarts his plan by sabotaging the Saviors' bullets.
Rick then wounds Negan. Against Maggie's wishes, Negan is spared and
imprisoned, ending the war.

Eighteen months after Negan's downfall, Rick proposes building a bridge to
ease trading, but this leads to more resentment. Rick is seemingly killed when
he destroys the bridge to prevent an invasion of walkers. Six years later, his
absence triggers discourse between the communities, and a new walker-
controlling threat named the Whisperers demand the survivors do not trespass
their territory. Their leader, Alpha, has acquired a large horde of walkers
that she will unleash if they do so. After her daughter Lydia abandons her
mother's group for the Kingdom's, Alpha disowns her and massacres many
residents during a fair.

In February 2019, the series was renewed for a tenth season which is scheduled
to premiere on October 6, 2019.[12][13] Danai Gurira, who has starred as
Michonne since the third season, affirmed that the tenth season will be her
last, and has only signed on for only a recurring role during the season. She
has stated however, that she may join Andrew Lincoln in the three follow-up
feature films.[14][15]

Executive producer David Alpert said in 2014 that the original comics have
given them enough ideas for Rick Grimes and company over the next seven years.
"I happen to love working from source material, specifically because we have a
pretty good idea of what season 10 is gonna be," Alpert said. "We know where
seasons 11 and 12 [will be]... we have benchmarks and milestones for those
seasons if we're lucky enough to get there."[16] In September 2018, AMC CEO
Josh Sapan stated that they plan on continuing _The Walking Dead_ franchise
for another 10 years, including new films and television series based on the
original comic book series.[17]

The list below contains those that have been credited within the series' title
sequence and those who are credited as "also starring". Recurring and guest
stars are listed on the individual season pages.

The series features several actors whom _Walking Dead_ developer Frank
Darabont has worked with previously, including Laurie Holden (Andrea), Jeffrey
DeMunn (Dale Horvath), Melissa McBride (Carol Peletier), Sam Witwer (the dead
soldier in the tank where Rick hides in "Days Gone Bye"), and Juan Pareja
(Morales). All five appeared in his 2007 film _The Mist_ , along with Thomas
Jane, who originally was set to star in the series when it was pitched to HBO.
Jane was later in talks with Darabont to possibly guest star on the series as
of fall 2010,[22] but with Darabont's departure,[23] it is unknown whether the
guest spot will happen or not. Laurie Holden also appeared in the 2001 film
_The Majestic_ (as Adele Stanton, Jim Carrey's character's love interest),
which Darabont directed. DeMunn has also appeared in several of Darabont's
films; in addition to _The Mist_ and _The Majestic_ , he appeared in _The
Shawshank Redemption_ (1994) and _The Green Mile_ (1999). It was planned that
Witwer (Private Jessup in Darabont's _The Mist_ ) would reprise his "Days Gone
Bye" role in the original conception of _The Walking Dead_ 's second-season
premiere[24] and in a webisode,[25] but both plans were discarded.[26]

On January 20, 2010, AMC officially announced that it had ordered a pilot for
a possible series adapted from _The Walking Dead_ comic book series, with
Frank Darabont and Gale Anne Hurd acting as executive producers and Darabont
writing and directing.[27] The entire series was pre-ordered based just on the
strength of the source material, the television scripts, and Darabont's
involvement.[28] In January 2010 a review of the pilot episode's script
attracted further attention.[29] The pilot began filming in Atlanta, Georgia
on May 15, 2010[30] after AMC had officially ordered a six-episode first
season.[31] The series' remaining episodes began filming on June 2, 2010 with
Darabont serving as showrunner.[32][33] On August 31, 2010, Darabont reported
that _The Walking Dead_ had been picked up for a second season, with
production to begin in February 2011. On November 8, 2010, AMC confirmed that
there would be a second season consisting of 13 episodes.[34] He would also
like to include some of the "environmental elements" that take place during
Volume 2 of Kirkman's book.[35]

The first season writing staff consisted of series developer and executive
producer Frank Darabont (who wrote/co-wrote four of the six episodes),
executive producer Charles H. Eglee, executive producer and creator of the
comic book Robert Kirkman, co-executive producer Jack LoGiudice, consulting
producer Adam Fierro and Glen Mazzara, all of whom contributed to one episode
each. Along with Darabont, who directed the pilot episode, the remaining five
were directed by Michelle MacLaren, Gwyneth Horder-Payton, Johan Renck, Ernest
Dickerson, and Guy Ferland, respectively.[36]

On December 1, 2010, _Deadline Hollywood_ reported that Darabont had fired his
writing staff, including executive producer Charles "Chic" Eglee, and planned
to use freelance writers for the second season.[37] Kirkman called the
announcement "premature" and clarified that Eglee left to pursue other
projects when Darabont decided to stay on as showrunner, and no definitive
plans had been made regarding the writing staff for the second season.[38]

[Chic Eglee] was brought onto _The Walking Dead_ with the idea that Frank was
going to work on the first season and then go off and do movies [...] Chic
didn't want to be second-in-command on a show when he's used to being a top
dog, and so he decided to go off and do something else, which is something
that happens and is not a big deal.

On December 3, 2010, in an interview with _Entertainment Weekly_ , executive
producer Gale Anne Hurd commented: "It's completely inaccurate. [In] the
writers' room, there are people that have set up other projects that will be
their first priority if their own series is picked up as a pilot or if it's a
series. I think [Eglee] just decided that he wants to run his own show." She
revealed that it would be likely for the series to return in October 2011, as
Darabont and Kirkman planned on mapping out the next season early in 2011. She
also confirmed that, "every one of the principal cast is signed up for
multiple seasons."[39] In July 2011, series developer and showrunner Frank
Darabont was fired from his position as showrunner for the series, over
unethical business practices from AMC higher-ups (see Lawsuits below).[40]

Executive producer Glen Mazzara was appointed the new showrunner in Darabont's
place.[41] New writers joined the writing staff in the second season,
including co-executive producer Evan Reilly, producer Scott M. Gimple, story
editor Angela Kang, and David Leslie Johnson. New writers in the third season
included producers Nichole Beattie and Sang Kyu Kim, with Frank Renzulli
contributing a freelance script.

After the conclusion of the third season, Glen Mazzara stepped down from his
position as showrunner and executive producer for the series, per a mutual
agreement between Mazzara and AMC. The press release read, "Both parties
acknowledge that there is a difference of opinion about where the show should
go moving forward, and conclude that it is best to part ways."[42] Scott M.
Gimple succeeded Mazzara as showrunner for the fourth season,[43] with new
writers joining the writing staff, such as Curtis Gwinn, Channing Powell, and
Matt Negrete.[44] In January 2018, it was announced that Gimple would be
promoted to the newly created position of Chief Content Officer of the entire
_Walking Dead_ franchise, and that Angela Kang would replace him as showrunner
beginning with the ninth season.[45][46]

The television series generally tends to follow Kirkman's comic series across
major characters and plots; for instance, events of the premiere episode of
the seventh season correlate to events in issue #100 of the comics.[47][48]
The series does not attempt to go step-by-step with the comics, and has leeway
in the narrative. In particular, the series' writers, along with Kirkman,
often "transfer" how a character has died in the comics to a different
character in the series. For example, in the fourth season, where Hershel
Greene is beheaded by the Governor in the standoff with Rick's group at the
prison; in the comic, Tyreese is the one who suffers this fate.[47] Some of
the television characters, like Carol, have far outlived their comic
counterparts, while others that have already been killed off, like Sophia and
Andrea, remained alive for some time in the ongoing comic series.[48] In
addition, the writers have included characters wholly novel to the series such
as Daryl Dixon, which producer Gale Anne Hurd says helps to create a new
dynamic for the series, and keeps the audience guessing from what had already
been established in the comic series.[49]

_The Walking Dead_ has featured a large rotating ensemble cast. In most cases,
because of the nature of the show, departure of actors from the show are
determined by the writing, with characters either killed off or written off
the show as necessary to develop the story. Cast members are generally told
ahead of time if they have been written off the show, but otherwise kept to
secrecy. For example, Steven Yeun, who played Glenn Rhee since the pilot
through the season seven premiere, knew of his character's death for a year
but had to keep quiet,[50] while Chandler Riggs, playing Carl Grimes through
the eighth season, was told of his character's departure during the filming in
the weeks leading into his final episodes.[51]

A few actors have left the show under their own terms due to other commitments
or changes, with the writings adopting the plot around these changes:

Casting salaries for the principle actors have grown significantly over the
course of the show, up through the seventh season. Overall, the salaries had
been lower compared to other similar dramas, including AMC's own _Mad Men_ ,
but this was justified due to the volatility of any character being
potentially written off the show. Norman Reedus and Melissa McBride, playing
Daryl Dixon and Carol Peletier respectively, had made around US$9,500 per
episode during the first season, and by the seventh season, had gotten up to
US$80,000 per episode. Lincoln himself was only earning US$90,000 per episode
in the seventh season.[58] By season nine, with the departure of Lincoln,
Reedus had repeated secured a US$350,000 per episode pay plus additional
incentives, potentially earning him US$50-90 million over three seasons.
McBride similarly had gotten a extended contract in season nine worth US$20
million over three seasons. Both of these were intended to secure the pair as
central figures for the show going forward in Lincoln's absence.[59]

Bear McCreary was hired to compose the score for the series. McCreary stated
that the main theme was based on his viewing of production designs for the
opening title sequence. Instead of doing a full theme song as with his earlier
works, McCreary chose to use a simple, repeating motif from the strings
section.[60]

It repeats over and over, and in fact in the pilot episode, you start hearing
it before the main title begins, and this is something that continues episode
to episode. You hear the main title music before the main title begins, so you
know it's coming. That, to me, was the little hook â€“ that little thing that,
whenever you hear it, it takes you to the series.

Four soundtracks for _The Walking Dead_ have been released to date. _The
Walking Dead: AMC Original Soundtrack, Vol. 1_ was released on March 17,
2013.[61] The second volume was released on March 25, 2014.[62] _Songs of
Survival_ is a soundtrack for the third season and it was released on August
27, 2013, by Republic Records as a Walmart exclusive for the special edition
release of the third season.[63] _Songs of Survival, Vol. 2_ is a soundtrack
for the fourth season and it was released on August 26, 2014, by Republic
Records as a Walmart exclusive of the fourth season release.[64]

Greg Nicotero is an executive producer and the key special effects makeup
artist on the series. Each walker is put through "zombie school" and is taught
how to move like zombies. There are three levels of zombie makeup: Hero,
Midground, and Deep Background. Hero zombies are featured walkers and are
completely made over from head to toe. Midground zombies get highlights and
shadows on the face, but do not get close enough to the camera to require full
makeup. Deep background zombies often wear masks and are only meant to be used
as a backdrop.[65]

_The Walking Dead_ is mostly filmed in Georgia.[66] Since 2002, the state has
offered a tax incentive for large film productions to drive producers to the
state and bolster its economy.[67]

The first season was filmed primarily in Atlanta, though required a great deal
of coordination with the city to shut down streets and parks for film.[67]
Production for subsequent seasons moved mainly to Riverwood Studios (doing
business as Raleigh Studios Atlanta), a plot of land approximately 120 acres
(0.49 km2) outside of Senoia, Georgia. Some existing buildings were used here,
such as a subdivision that is used by several families that serves as the
Alexandria Safe-Zone, while other buildings are constructed as sets, such as
the exterior shots of the main Hilltop mansion, the trash heaps used by the
Scavengers, or Father Gabriel's church. Sets are torn down when no longer
needed; the church, after its use in the fifth season, was removed and its
spot used for the iconic setting for the first meeting between Rick's group
and Negan in the seventh season. The property includes sound stages
constructed for interior shots, which then may be reused; the interior sets
for the prison during the third season were reused to serve as the buildings
and sets for the Savior's Sanctuary in the seventh season.[68][69] In July
2017, AMC purchased the studio lot from Riverwood for $8.25 million.[70]

Some scenes are shot outside of the studio. Woodbury, during the third season,
was filmed in downtown Senoia. Other exceptions include the Kingdom, which is
filmed at the former military base Fort McPherson, now converted to studios
for Tyler Perry.[68][69]

The series is completely shot on 16 mm film.[71] David Tattersall was the
director of photography for the pilot episode with David Boyd as the director
of photography on the remainder of the episodes. Production design is done by
Greg Melton and Alex Hajdu. The effects team includes veteran special effects
makeup designers Greg Nicotero and Toby Sells,[72] special effects coordinator
Darrell Pritchett, and visual effects supervisors Sam Nicholson and Jason
Sperling.[73]

_The Walking Dead_ debuted during the same week in 120 countries. As part of
an expansive campaign to advertise and heighten anticipation for the premiere,
AMC and Fox International Channels coordinated a worldwide zombie invasion
event on October 26, 2010. The stunt involved invading 26 major cities within
a 24-hour period, starting with Taipei and Hong Kong, and ending in Los
Angeles for the U.S. premiere.[74]

The series' official website released, just prior to the San Diego Comic-Con
in 2010, a motion comic based on Issue No. 1 of the original comic and voiced
by Phil LaMarr.[75] The site also posted a making-of documentary primarily
about the first episode, as well as a number of other behind-the-scenes videos
and interviews. In the documentary, comic series creator and television series
executive producer Robert Kirkman, as well as artist Charlie Adlard, say they
are pleased with how faithful the series is to the comic and remark on the
similarities between the actors and the comic's original character
drawings.[76]

Action figures of characters from the series were created for release in
November 2011 and have continued throughout the years with eight line-ups. The
figures, which are manufactured by McFarlane Toys, are designed to resemble
the actors on the series. Figures created to resemble the characters as drawn
in the comic book were released in September 2011.[77]

With a primary objective of reducing the environmental impacts of film and
television productions, including _The Walking Dead_ , producer Gale Anne Hurd
has directed the cast, crew, production team, suppliers, and bloggers about
her series to adopt the Doddle app to make the production almost paper-free;
this works by digitally transmitting interactive call sheets and other intra-
team and team-supplier communications (such as directions, images, menus, and
updates) to people's cell phones and tablets. Hurd said of using Doddle: in
addition to conserving paper, "It's also easier, and it's better for security.
People are less likely to leave their smartphone or tablet lying around for
someone else to pick up."[78][79]

Hurd describes additional steps taken to increase efficiency and cut
production costs: "If you use vehicles that get better gas mileage, that are
electric or hybrids, you're going to pay a lot less in fuel. If you use
compact fluorescent bulbs, you're going to save a lot of money in utilities.
If you recycle even your own sets, and use them again, that's going to save
money. You don't have to buy new lumber. So there are cost savings,
absolutely."[78] Additionally, the production team aims to reduce vehicle
idling, which decreases carbon dioxide emissions.[78][79][80]

Hurd also cuts down on plastic waste by personally using a refillable,
stainless steel EcoUsable water bottle and promoting its use among her
colleagues. She shared: "on a lot of my projects I give them as crew gifts
before we start production, and have water stations available, but you can't
force people to use them."[78]

To date, four web series based on _The Walking Dead_ have been released via
AMC's websiteâ€“ _Torn Apart_ (2011), _Cold Storage_ (2012), _The Oath_
(2013)[81] and _Red Machete_ (2017).[82]

In 2011, AMC debuted an animated comic book version of _The Walking Dead_
novel's beginning, featuring the voice of actor Phil LaMarr.[83]

A live television aftershow titled _Talking Dead_ premiered on AMC on October
16, 2011, following the encore presentation of _The Walking Dead_ 's second-
season premiere. _Talking Dead_ features host Chris Hardwick discussing the
latest episode with fans, actors, and producers of _The Walking Dead_.[84]

Following the departure of Andrew Lincoln as Rick Grimes during the ninth
season, chief content officer Scott Gimple stated that they plan to create
three AMC Original Films to explore events related to Rick's character in the
future, starring Lincoln, and with the first expected to begin production in
2019. Besides Lincoln, Pollyanna McIntosh (Jadis / Anne) will also star in
these films. Gimple stated that these will not simply be extended episodes,
nor will attempt to adapt any of the comic stories, but will heavily involve
Kirkman in their development.[53][85][86] The films will be released in
theaters by Universal Pictures.[87]

_Fear the Walking Dead_ is a companion series to _The Walking Dead_ ,
developed by AMC. AMC started development of the series around September 2013
and committed to a two-season broadcast by March 2015.[88][89][90] _Fear the
Walking Dead_ was first broadcast on August 23, 2015.[91]

_Fear the Walking Dead_ features a different set of characters, developed by
Kirkman. The series starts at the onset of the zombie apocalypse, and follows
several people that escape Los Angeles as the military attempts to quarantine
the city, and seek refuge along the west coast of the United States and
Mexico. The fourth season of _Fear the Walking Dead_ features a crossover with
_The Walking Dead_ , specifically through the character Morgan Jones (played
by Lennie James) who joins the cast of _Fear the Walking Dead_ after the
events of the eighth season of _The Walking Dead_.[92][93] Similarly, Dwight,
played by Austin Amelio, joined _Fear the Walking Dead_ for its fifth season
in 2019.[94]

AMC's COO Ed Carroll affirmed during the network's investors conference call
in February 2019 that the network was developing a second spin-off series for
_The Walking Dead_.[95] AMC officially announced it had ordered a 10-episode
series, created by Gimple and Negrete, in April 2019 with plans to broadcast
in 2020. The series would focus on the first generation of children that have
grown up during the zombie apocalypse, and are aware of how to survive if
confronted by them, but have otherwise been raised behind walls and have never
actually experienced survival.[96] The series will take place within Virginia,
and will feature two female leads.[97][98] Alexa Mansour, Nicolas Cantu, and
Hal Cumpston were confirmed as the show's leads in the new series in July
2019.[99] Later in July, Annet Mahendru and Aliyah Royale joined the
cast.[100] Production began in July 2019 in Richmond, Virginia, with Jordan
Vogt-Roberts directing the pilot.[101]

Due to its popularity, _The Walking Dead_ has inspired dozens of parodies and
spoofs featured on YouTube channels like Bad Lip Reading and television series
such as _Saturday Night Live_[102][103][104] and _Mad TV_.[105] Bad Lip
Reading made a widely viewed parody involving Rick and the Governor, entitled
"La-Bibbida-Bibba-Dum".[106] The series' cast was shown the parody at the San
Diego Comic-Con in 2013, and David Morrisseyâ€”who portrays the Governorâ€”
reacted by saying he now understood why so many people would walk up to him on
the street and blurt, "Hey, La-Bibbida-Bibba-Dum!" Until seeing the video, he
had wondered, "what's wrong with these people?"[107] _The Walking Dead_ has
also been represented as a live comedy performance by English comedian Dan
Willis at the Edinburgh Festival.[108] A parody film called _The Walking
Deceased_ was released in 2015.[109]

Scenes from the pilot were screened July 23, 2010, as part of the San Diego
Comic-Con in 2010.[110] It premiered on AMC on October 31, 2010, and premiered
internationally on Fox International Channels during the first week of
November.[111][112] Almost two weeks before the official premiere on AMC, the
pilot episode leaked online.[113]

International broadcast rights for the series were sold and announced on June
14, 2010.[114] The series airs on Fox International Channels in 126 countries
in 33 languages. The fifth season debuted its first part on October 13,
2014.[115] The second part premiered on February 9, 2015.[116]

The first season DVD and Blu-ray was released on March 8, 2011.[117] A three-
disc special edition of the first seasonâ€”featuring new featurettes and audio
commentariesâ€”was released on DVD and Blu-ray on October 4, 2011.[118] The
European versions of the first season DVD and Blu-ray are edited for gore,
with cuts to episode two ("Guts"),[119] episode three ("Tell It to the
Frogs"),[120] episode four ("Vatos")[121] and episode five ("Wildfire").[122]
Until eOne/WVG re-released the first season in D-A-CH in a _Special Uncut
Version_ on DVD and Blu-ray on May 31, 2013.[123]

The second season DVD and Blu-ray was released on August 28, 2012. It was also
released as a limited edition Blu-ray, packaged as a miniature zombie head
designed by McFarlane Toys. Special features include audio commentaries,
deleted scenes, webisodes, and several featurettes.[124]

The third season DVD and Blu-ray was released on August 27, 2013. It was also
released as a limited edition Blu-ray, packaged as a miniature version of the
Governor's zombie head aquarium tank designed by Greg Nicotero and sculpted by
McFarlane Toys. Special features include audio commentaries, deleted scenes,
and several featurettes.[125]

The fourth season DVD and Blu-ray was released on August 26, 2014. It was also
released as a limited edition Blu-ray, packaged with a tree-walker designed by
McFarlane Toys. Special features include audio commentaries, deleted scenes,
and several featurettes, as well as extended episodes which are exclusive to
the Blu-ray.[126]

The fifth season DVD and Blu-ray was released on August 25, 2015,[127] the
sixth season DVD and Blu-ray was released on August 23, 2016,[128] the seventh
season DVD and Blu-ray was released on August 22, 2017,[129] the eighth season
DVD and Blu-ray was released on August 21, 2018,[130] and the ninth season DVD
and Blu-ray was released on August 20, 2019.[131]

Home video release for the first six seasons was distributed by Anchor Bay
Entertainment, and home video release for the seventh season onwards was
distributed by Lionsgate Home Entertainment in the United States for the
American home video releases. The international home video release were
distributed by Entertainment One.

MyNetworkTV acquired the broadcast syndication rights to the series,
premiering on October 1, 2014.[132] The version that airs on MyNetworkTV is
edited to meet broadcast television standards.[133]

The first six seasons and the ninth season of _The Walking Dead_ have been
well reviewed by recognized critics, while the seventh and eighth seasons
received more mixed reviews.

For the first season, 88% of 28 Rotten Tomatoes critics gave it a positive
review, with an average score of 7.53/10. That site's consensus states,
"Blood-spattered, emotionally resonant, and white-knuckle intense, _The
Walking Dead_ puts an intelligent spin on the overcrowded zombie
subgenre."[134] Metacritic scored the first season 82/100 based on 25 critic
reviews, 23 of which were positive, two mixed, and none negative.[135]

For the second season, 81% of 24 critic reviews on Rotten Tomatoes were
positive, with an average score of 8.09/10. The site's consensus states, "The
second season of The Walking Dead fleshes out the characters while maintaining
the grueling tension and gore that made the show a hit."[136] Of 22 Metacritic
critic reviews, 18 were positive, four were mixed, and none were negative;
their average score was 80/100.[137] Early criticism of the series focused on
the slow pace of the second season, particularly the first half. Ken Tucker of
_Entertainment Weekly_ , described the series as "a nighttime soap", comparing
it to "a parody of a Samuel Beckett play" that had very little sense of
direction and few appearances of walkers.[150] Nate Rawlings of _Time_ 's
online entertainment section noted that "the pace during the first half of
this season has been brutally slow. [...] They've tried to develop individual
characters, but each subplot meant to add a layer to a character has been
quickly resolved."[151] Later reviews from other critics, such as Scott
Wampler of Collider.com, recognized the increased quality of the second half,
stating it "seemed far more intense, more interesting, better written".[152]
Recognizing the overall season, Kevin Yeoman of _Screen Rant_ offered praise
saying "the writers succeeded in unshackling themselves from the intermittent
monotony brought about by the serial nature of the show".[153]

The third season had 88% of Rotten Tomatoes' 33 critics giving it a positive
review, with an average score of 7.96/10. The site's consensus states, "The
palpable terror and visceral thrills continue in the third season of _The
Walking Dead_ , along with a deeper sense of the people who inhabit its
apocalyptic landscape."[138] Metacritic's 19 critics rated the season 82/100,
all of whom gave a positive review.[139]

For the fourth season, 83% of Rotten Tomatoes' 31 critic reviews were
positive, with an average score of 7.66/10. The site's consensus states,
"Consistently thrilling, with solid character development and enough gore to
please grindhouse fans, this season of _The Walking Dead_ continues to
demonstrate why it's one of the best horror shows on television".[140]
Metacritic scored the season 75/100 based on 16 critic reviews, 13 of which
were positive, three mixed, and none negative.[141]

The fifth season had 89% of Rotten Tomatoes' 31 critic reviews rating it
positively, with an average score of 7.87/10. The site's consensus states,
"Thanks to a liberal dose of propulsive, bloody action and enough compelling
character moments to reward longtime fans, _The Walking Dead_ 's fifth season
continues to deliver top-notch entertainment."[142] Metacritic scored the
fifth season 80/100 based on 11 critic reviews, all of which were
positive.[143]

For the sixth season, 77% of Rotten Tomatoes' 23 critic reviews were positive,
with an average score of 7.35/10. The site's consensus states, "Six seasons
in, _The Walking Dead_ is still finding ways to top itself, despite slow
patches that do little to advance the plot."[144] Metacritic scored the sixth
season 79/100 based on 10 critic reviews, nine of which were positive, one
mixed, and none negative.[145]

For the seventh season, 63% of Rotten Tomatoes' 12 critic reviews rated it
positively, with an average score of 6.97/10. The site's consensus is,
"Increased character depth and effective world-building helps _The Walking
Dead_ overcome a tiresome reliance on excessive, gratuitous violence."[146]

For the eighth season, 64% of Rotten Tomatoes' 16 critic reviews rated it
positively, with an average score of 6.68/10. The site's consensus states "
_The Walking Dead_ 's eighth season energizes its characters with some much-
needed angst and action, though it's still occasionally choppy and lacking
forward-moving plot progression."[147]

For the ninth season, 91% of Rotten Tomatoes' 19 critic reviews were positive,
with an average score of 7.22/10. The site's consensus states, "Nine seasons
in, _The Walking Dead_ feels more alive than ever, with heightened tension and
a refreshed pace that rejuvenates this long-running franchise."[148]
Metacritic scored the ninth season 72/100 based on 4 critic reviews, 3 of
which were positive, one mixed, and none negative.[149]

In 2013, TV Guide ranked _The Walking Dead_ as the #8 sci-fi show.[154]

Some critics have commented on the increasing diversity of the series. This
approach was initially applauded by commentators but some have later claimed
it had reached what they described as "critical mass". From 2015 some began to
question whether the show was in danger of becoming "too diverse".[155] Robert
Kirkman has discussed the increasing diversity of the show and the comic
books. He has described how he regrets the lack of diversity in the early
issues of the comic book series and explained how they would have been "vastly
more diverse" if he were to have started them now.[156] Other commentators
have noted that "all of the Walking Dead's relationships are now interracial
or LGBT" and refers to Carol and Ezekiel, which is a change from Michonne and
Ezekiel in the comics, Rosita and Gabriel, Jerry and Nabila, Magna and Yumiko,
Glenn and Maggie and Rick and Michonne. The writer admits he "doesn't know why
[he] wanted to stop and point all this out".[157]

In 2014, total viewership for the show's fifth-season premiere was 17.3
million, making it the most-watched series episode in cable history.[158][159]
In 2016, a _New York Times_ study of the 50 television series with the most
Facebook likes found that like most other zombie series, _The Walking Dead_
"is most popular in rural areas, particularly southern Texas and eastern
Kentucky".[160] Ratings dropped steeply during seasons 8 and 9 and were blamed
on a variety of factors including Rick's "death". By the end of Season 9 fewer
viewers were watching than at any time since Season 1.[161]

_The Walking Dead_ was nominated for Best New Series by the Writers Guild of
America Awards 2011[4] and Best Television Series Drama by the 68th Golden
Globe Awards.[5] The series was named one of the top 10 television programs of
2010 by the American Film Institute Awards 2010.[188] For the 37th Saturn
Awards, the series received six nominationsâ€”for Best Television Presentation,
Andrew Lincoln for Best Actor in Television, Sarah Wayne Callies for Best
Actress on Television, Steven Yeun for Best Supporting Actor in Television,
Laurie Holden for Best Supporting Actress in Television, and Noah Emmerich for
Best Guest Starring Role in Television.[189] The series was nominated for Best
Drama Series by the inaugural 1st Critics' Choice Television Awards.[190] The
pilot episode "Days Gone Bye" received three nominations from the 63rd
Primetime Emmy Awardsâ€”for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series and
Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series[191] and won for Outstanding
Prosthetic Makeup for a Series, Miniseries, Movie, or Special.[192] For the
41st Saturn Awards, the series received its highest number of nominations,
with a total of seven, including for the series itself, Andrew Lincoln for
Best Actor on Television, Norman Reedus for Best Supporting Actor on
Television, Emily Kinney and Melissa McBride for Best Supporting Actress on
Television, Andrew J. West for Best Guest Star on Television, and Chandler
Riggs for Best Young Performer on Television.[193]

Darabont's departure as showrunner in July 2011 during the second season came
as surprise to many, as it came shortly after the season's premiere and a few
days after that year's Comic-Con, where Darabont helped to promote the
series.[194] It was speculated that he was unable to adjust to the schedule of
running a television series;[195] however, _The Hollywood Reporter_ reported
that AMC had fired him. There had been reported difficulties in the production
of the second season, including disputes over planned budget cuts and
executive meddling, and it was known that Darabont and AMC had several
discussions relating to these factors. Neither Darabont, AMC, nor the cast nor
crew of _The Walking Dead_ spoke about the reasons for his firing.[196]

In December 2013, Darabont and his agents from Creative Artists Agency (CAA)
filed a lawsuit against AMC in a New York court, citing breach of contract. A
central part of Darabont's lawsuit accuses AMC of denying him and the CAA the
promised profits from the success of the series, based on how AMC had used
vertical integration in producing and distributing _The Walking Dead_.[194] As
stated in Darabont's filing, he had initially entered into a contract with AMC
to have a third-party studio produce the series, from which he would have
obtained 12.5% of that entity's profits, after standard deductions. AMC wanted
to produce the series in-house, and for the first season, Darabont's lawyers
had been assured that Darabont would be protected from self-dealing fees by
having AMC commit to imputed license fees equivalent to those of other
independent studios, with Darabont earning profit from that. Darabont's suit
contends that when the series' popularity took off, AMC presented a license
fee deal to Darabont around February 2011 that used "an unconscionably low
license fee formula" such that AMC could report the series running at a loss
and ensuring that Darabont would never see any profit from the series; as an
example, the suit references statements in 2012, following the second season,
that AMC claimed the series was running at a $49 million deficit, despite
being one of the most popular series in broadcast.[194] Darabont's suit
contends he was fired just at the start of the second season so that AMC would
avoid having to pay him.[194]

Initial discovery phase hearings were held in 2014. Darabont's lawyers sought
to gain information from AMC on their other series, specifically _Breaking
Bad_ and _Mad Men_ , to obtain a "fair market value" for _The Walking Dead_.
AMC asserted it had done no wrongdoing, had already paid Darabont $3 million
upfront for two seasons, and was able to properly set the imputed license fee
that worked into the profit formula for Darabont. The network resisted the
request to provide otherwise confidential information on the other
series.[197] The court granted Darabont's lawyers access to the requested
information as part of the discovery phase.[198] Darabont described "crisis-
level problems" during the series' production while under deposition, claiming
that AMC had cut the per-episode budget from $3.4 million to $3 million while
keeping the tax credit offered by the state of Georgia for filming there,
effectively reducing the production budget by 25%.[199]

In August 2015, Darabont requested to amend his original complaint that AMC
further reduced his profits from the second season as his firing mid-season
meant he was not fully vested in the season, allowing AMC to reduce the
profits paid him. Darabont's amended request points out that he had written
and produced all the episodes in that season already and was entitled to the
proper profit share.[200] The judge granted this amendment in February 2016,
partially influenced by concerns raised in Darabont's deposition.[201]

At the end of the discovery phase in September 2016, Darabont's lawyers stated
they are seeking damages of over $280 million; AMC stated they will
"vigorously" defend against the lawsuit.[202] Summary judgement statements
were completed in July 2017.[203] While waiting for summary judgement,
Darabont and the CAA filed a second lawsuit against AMC, based on further
evaluation of material from the discovery phase. The second suit contended
that AMC purposely manipulated some of its licensing fees that should go to
Darabont, such as revenue from digital sales and from overseas markets.[204]
Though AMC had initially refused to provide necessary documents for discovery
for this new case, AMC did offer to willingly provide them after Darabont's
attorneys threatened further legal action during October 2018.[205] By
December 2018, the presiding judge ruled against issuing summary judgement in
the case, setting up for a jury trial to hear the full case.[206] Due to the
retirement of the judge that had overseen the previous cases, a new judge was
assigned to the case in February 2019, who joined both the initial 2013 suit
and the 2018 suit into a single case, expected to be heard in May 2020.[207]

In August 2017, Robert Kirkman, Gale Anne Hurd, Charles Eglee, Glen Mazzara
and David Alpert filed similar lawsuits against AMC, citing breach of contract
over profits owed to them as a result of AMC's vertical integration. As with
Darabont, each had been given a certain percentage of the series' profits
based on if the series was produced by a third-party, but when it was
transitioned to AMC Studios, their share was dramatically reduced. _The
Hollywood Reporter_ estimated that if the four seek similar damages as
Darabont, the lawsuit could be as high as $1 billion.[208] The suits, filed
separately in Los Angeles and New York City, will be consolidated into a
single case to be heard in a California court.[209] Kirkman and the others
said that despite the lawsuit, they will continue to work as "partners" with
AMC to assure continued success of _The Walking Dead_ and its spinoff series
_Fear the Walking Dead_.[210]

