The **United States Department of State** ( **DOS** ),[3] commonly referred to
as the **State Department** , is a federal executive department responsible
for carrying out U.S. foreign policy and international relations. Established
in 1789 as the nation's first executive department,[4] its duties include
advising the U.S. President, administering the nation's diplomatic missions,
negotiating treaties and agreements with foreign entities, and representing
the U.S. at the United Nations.

The department is led by the Secretary of State, a member of the Cabinet who
is nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate. The Secretary of
State serves as the nation's chief diplomat and representative abroad, and is
the first Cabinet official in the order of precedence and in the presidential
line of succession.

The State Department is headquartered in the Harry S Truman Building, a few
blocks away from the White House, in the Foggy Bottom neighborhood of
Washington, D.C.; "Foggy Bottom" is thus sometimes used as a metonym. The
current Secretary of State is Mike Pompeo, who ascended to the office in April
2018 after Rex Tillerson resigned.

The U.S. Constitution, drafted in Philadelphia in September 1787 and ratified
by the 13 states the following year, gave the President the responsibility for
conducting the nation's foreign relations.

To that end, Congress approved legislation to establish a **Department of
Foreign Affairs** on July 21, 1789, and President Washington signed it into
law on July 27, making the Department of Foreign Affairs the first federal
agency to be created under the new Constitution.[5] This legislation remains
the basic law of the Department of State.

In September 1789, additional legislation changed the name of the agency to
the **Department of State** and assigned to it a variety of domestic duties.
These responsibilities grew to include management of the United States Mint,
keeper of the Great Seal of the United States, and the taking of the census.
President George Washington signed the new legislation on September 15.[6]
Most of these domestic duties were eventually transferred to various new
federal departments and agencies established during the 19th century. However,
the Secretary of State still retains a few domestic responsibilities, such as
being the keeper of the Great Seal and being the officer to whom a President
or Vice President of the United States wishing to resign must deliver an
instrument in writing declaring the decision to resign.

On September 29, 1789, President Washington appointed Thomas Jefferson of
Virginia, then Minister to France, to be the first United States Secretary of
State.[7] John Jay had been serving as Secretary of Foreign Affairs as a
holdover from the Confederation since before Washington had taken office; he
would continue in that capacity until Jefferson returned from Europe many
months later.

From 1790 to 1800, the State Department was headquartered in Philadelphia, the
capital of the United States at the time. It occupied a building at Church and
Fifth Streets (although, for a short period during which a yellow fever
epidemic ravaged the city, it resided in the New Jersey State House in
Trenton, New Jersey).[8] In 1800, it moved from Philadelphia to Washington,
D.C., where it first briefly occupied the Treasury Building[8] and then the
Seven Buildings at 19th Street and Pennsylvania Avenue.[9] The State
Department moved several times throughout the capital in the ensuing decades,
including Six Buildings in September 1800;[10] the War Office Building west of
the White House in May 1801;[11] the Treasury Building once more from
September 1819 to November 1866[12] (except for a period between September
1814 to April 1816, during which it occupied a structure at G and 18th Streets
NW while the Treasury Building was repaired);[11] the Washington City Orphan
Home from November 1866 to July 1875;[13] and the State, War, and Navy
Building in 1875.[14]

Since May 1947, the State Department has been based in the Harry S. Truman
Building in the Foggy Bottom neighborhood of Washington; it is therefore
sometimes metonymically referred to as "Foggy Bottom".[15][16][17]

Madeleine Albright became the first woman to become the Secretary of State and
the first foreign-born woman to serve in the Cabinet when she was appointed in
1997. Condoleezza Rice became the second female Secretary of State in 2005 and
the second African-American after Colin Powell. Hillary Clinton became the
third female Secretary of State when she was appointed in 2009.

In 2014, the State Department began expanding into the Navy Hill Complex
across 23rd Street NW from the Truman Building.[18] A joint venture consisting
of the architectural firms of Goody, Clancy and the Louis Berger Group won a
$2.5 million contract in January 2014 to begin planning the renovation of the
buildings on the 11.8 acres (4.8 ha) Navy Hill campus, which housed the World
War II headquarters of the Office of Strategic Services and was the first
headquarters of the Central Intelligence Agency.[19]

The Executive Branch and the U.S. Congress have constitutional
responsibilities for U.S. foreign policy. Within the Executive Branch, the
Department of State is the lead U.S. foreign affairs agency, and its head, the
Secretary of State, is the President's principal foreign policy advisor. The
Department advances U.S. objectives and interests in the world through its
primary role in developing and implementing the President's foreign policy. It
also provides an array of important services to U.S. citizens and to
foreigners seeking to visit or immigrate to the United States. All foreign
affairs activities—U.S. representation abroad, foreign assistance programs,
countering international crime, foreign military training programs, the
services the Department provides, and more—are paid for by the foreign affairs
budget, which represents little more than 1% of the total federal budget. As
stated by the Department of State, its purpose includes:

The Department of State conducts these activities with a civilian workforce,
and normally uses the Foreign Service personnel system for positions that
require service abroad. Employees may be assigned to diplomatic missions
abroad to represent The United States, analyze and report on political,
economic, and social trends; adjudicate visas; and respond to the needs of
U.S. citizens abroad. The U.S. maintains diplomatic relations with about 180
countries and maintains relations with many international organizations,
adding up to a total of more than 250 posts around the world. In the United
States, about 5,000 professional, technical, and administrative employees work
compiling and analyzing reports from overseas, providing logistical support to
posts, communicating with the American public, formulating and overseeing the
budget, issuing passports and travel warnings, and more. In carrying out these
responsibilities, the Department of State works in close coordination with
other federal agencies, including the Department of Defense, the Department of
the Treasury, and the Department of Commerce. As required by the principle of
checks and balances, the Department also consults with Congress about foreign
policy initiatives and policies.

The DOS promotes and protects the interests of American citizens by (1)
'Promoting peace and stability in regions of vital interest'; (2) 'Creating
jobs at home by opening markets abroad'; (3) 'Helping developing nations
establish investment and export opportunities'; and (4) 'Bringing nations
together and forging partnerships to address global problems, such as
terrorism, the spread of communicable diseases, cross-border pollution,
humanitarian crises, nuclear smuggling, and narcotics trafficking.'[21]

BioPrepWatch reported that, on May 30, 2013, the State Department submitted
the _Country Reports on Terrorism 2012_ to Congress. Most terrorist attacks
have been decentralized and target the Middle East countries. There have been
no other reports that have previously talked about this topic, but the biggest
shifts in terrorism in 2012 included an increase in state-sponsored terrorism
in Iran. The State Department states the best way to counter international
terrorist attacks is to work with international partners to cut funding,
strengthen law-enforcing institutions, and eliminate terrorist safe
havens.[22]

The Secretary of State is the chief executive officer of the Department of
State and a member of the Cabinet that answers directly to, and advises, the
President of the United States. The secretary organizes and supervises the
entire department and its staff.[23]

The Department of State has 75,547 employees (2018), including 13,855 Foreign
Service Officers and 49,734 Locally Employed Staff, whose duties are primarily
serving overseas. In addition, 10,171 employees form part of the predominantly
domestic Civil Service.[24]

Since the 1996 reorganization, the Administrator of the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID), while leading an independent agency,
has also reported to the Secretary of State, as does the United States
Ambassador to the United Nations.

Diplomats in Residence are career Foreign Service Officers and Specialists
located throughout the U.S. who provide guidance and advice on careers,
internships, and fellowships to students and professionals in the communities
they serve. Diplomats in Residence represent 16 population-based regions that
encompass the United States.[30]

The Fulbright Program, including the Fulbright–Hays Program, is a program of
competitive, merit-based grants for international educational exchange for
students, scholars, teachers, professionals, scientists and artists, founded
by United States Senator J. William Fulbright in 1946. Under the Fulbright
Program, competitively selected U.S. citizens may become eligible for
scholarships to study, conduct research, or exercise their talents abroad; and
citizens of other countries may qualify to do the same in the United States.
The program was established to increase mutual understanding between the
people of the United States and other countries through the exchange of
persons, knowledge, and skills.

The Fulbright Program provides 8,000 grants annually to undertake graduate
study, advanced research, university lecturing, and classroom teaching. In the
2015–16 cycle, 17% and 24% of American applicants were successful in securing
research and English Teaching Assistance grants, respectively. However,
selectivity and application numbers vary substantially by country and by type
of grant. For example, grants were awarded to 30% of Americans applying to
teach English in Laos and 50% of applicants to do research in Laos. In
contrast, 6% of applicants applying to teach English in Belgium were
successful compared to 16% of applicants to do research in Belgium.[31][32]

The U.S. Department of State's Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs
sponsors the Fulbright Program from an annual appropriation from the U.S.
Congress. Additional direct and in-kind support comes from partner
governments, foundations, corporations, and host institutions both in and
outside the U.S.[33] The Fulbright Program is administered by cooperating
organizations like the Institute of International Education. It operates in
over 160 countries around the world.[34] In each of 49 countries, a bi-
national Fulbright Commission administers and oversees the Fulbright Program.
In countries without a Fulbright Commission but that have an active program,
the Public Affairs Section of the U.S. Embassy oversees the Fulbright Program.
More than 360,000 persons have participated in the program since it began.
Fifty-four Fulbright alumni have won Nobel Prizes;[35] eighty-two have won
Pulitzer Prizes.[36]

The Jefferson Science Fellows Program was established in 2003 by the DoS to
establish a new model for engaging the American academic science, technology,
engineering and medical communities in the formulation and implementation of
U.S. foreign policy.[37][38] The Fellows (as they are called, if chosen for
this program) are paid around $50,000 during the program and can earn special
bonuses of up to $10,000. The whole point of this program is so that these
Fellows will know the ins and outs of the Department of State/USAID to help
with the daily functioning.[39] There is no one winner every year rather it's
a program that you apply for and follow a process that starts in August and
takes a full year to learn the final results of your ranking. It isn't solely
based on achievement alone but intelligence and writing skills that have to
show that you encompass all of what the committee is looking for. First you
start with the online application then you start to write your curriculum
vitae which explains more about yourself and your education and job experience
then you move onto your statement of interest and essay where you have your
common essay and your briefing memo. Finally you wrap up with letters of
recommendations and letters of nominations to show that you are not the only
person who believes that they should be a part of this program.

The Franklin Fellows Program was established in 2006 by the DoS to bring in
mid-level executives from the private sector and non-profit organizations to
advise the Department and to work on projects.[40] Fellows may also work with
other government entities, including the Congress, White House, and executive
branch agencies, including the Department of Defense, Department of Commerce,
and Department of Homeland Security. The program is named in honor of Benjamin
Franklin, and aims to bring mid-career professionals to enrich and expand the
Department's capabilities. Unlike the Jefferson Science Fellows Program this
is based on volunteer work as you do not get paid to be a part of this. Rather
you have sponsors or you contribute your own money in order to fulfill what it
will take to do the year long program. The more seniority you have in this
program determines what kind of topics you work on and the priority that the
issues are to the country. Although the bottom line is that the other Fellows
are the ones with the final say of where you are placed however they try to
take into account where you would like to be placed.[41]

In 1978, the Bureau for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs
(INL) formed an office to use excess military and government aircraft for
support of foreign nations' counter-narcotics operations. The first aircraft
used was a crop duster used for eradication of illicit crops in Mexico in
cooperation with the local authorities. The separate Air Wing was established
in 1986 as use of aviation assets grew in the war on drugs.[42]

The aircraft fleet grew from crop spraying aircraft to larger transports and
helicopters used to support ground troops and transport personnel. As these
operations became more involved in direct combat, a further need for search
and rescue and armed escort helicopters was evident. Operations in the 1980s
and 1990s were primarily carried out in Colombia, Guatemala, Peru, Bolivia and
Belize. Many aircraft have since been passed on to the governments involved,
as they became capable of taking over the operations themselves.[ _citation
needed_ ]

Following the September 11 attacks and the subsequent War on Terror, the Air
Wing went on to expand its operations from mainly anti-narcotics operations to
also support security of United States nationals and interests, primarily in
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Safe transports for various diplomatic missions were
undertaken, requiring the acquisition of larger aircraft types, such as
Sikorsky S-61, Boeing Vertol CH-46, Beechcraft King Air and De Haviland
DHC-8-300. In 2011, the Air Wing was operating more than 230 aircraft around
the world, the main missions still being counter narcotics and transportation
of state officials.[42]

In FY 2010 the Department of State, together with 'Other International
Programs' (for example, USAID), had a combined projected discretionary budget
of $51.7 billion.[43] The United States Federal Budget for Fiscal Year 2010,
entitled 'A New Era of Responsibility', specifically 'Imposes Transparency on
the Budget' for the Department of State.[43]

The end-of-year FY 2010 DoS Agency Financial Report, approved by Secretary
Clinton on November 15, 2010, showed actual total costs for the year of $27.4
billion.[44] Revenues of $6.0 billion, $2.8 billion of which were earned
through the provision of consular and management services, reduced total net
cost to $21.4 billion.[44]

Total program costs for 'Achieving Peace and Security' were $7.0 billion;
'Governing Justly and Democratically', $0.9 billion; 'Investing in People',
$4.6 billion; 'Promoting Economic Growth and Prosperity', $1.5 billion;
'Providing Humanitarian Assistance', $1.8 billion; 'Promoting International
Understanding', $2.7 billion; 'Strengthening Consular and Management
Capabilities', $4.0 billion; 'Executive Direction and Other Costs Not
Assigned', $4.2 billion.[44]

The Department of State's independent auditors are Kearney & Company.[45]
Since in FY 2009 Kearney & Company qualified its audit opinion, noting
material financial reporting weaknesses, the DoS restated its 2009 financial
statements in 2010.[45] In its FY 2010 audit report, Kearney & Company
provided an unqualified audit opinion while noting significant deficiencies,
of controls in relation to financial reporting and budgetary accounting, and
of compliance with a number of laws and provisions relating to financial
management and accounting requirements.[45] In response the DoS Chief
Financial Officer observed that "The Department operates in over 270 locations
in 172 countries, while conducting business in 150 currencies and an even
larger number of languages ... Despite these complexities, the Department
pursues a commitment to financial integrity, transparency, and accountability
that is the equal of any large multi-national corporation."[46]

Since 1973 the primary record keeping system of the Department of State is the
Central Foreign Policy File. It consists of copies of official telegrams,
airgrams, reports, memorandums, correspondence, diplomatic notes, and other
documents related to foreign relations.[47] Over 1,000,000 records spanning
the time period from 1973 to 1979 can be accessed online from the National
Archives and Records Administration.[48]

In the latest Center for Effective Government analysis of 15 federal agencies
which receive the most Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests published in
2015 (using 2012 and 2013 data, the most recent years available), the State
Department was the lowest performer, earning an F by scoring only 37 out of a
possible 100 points, i.e. failed the grade, unchanged from 2013. The State
Department's score was dismal due to its extremely low processing score of 23
percent, which was completely out of line with any other agency's
performance.[49]

In 2009, the Department of State was the fourth most desired employer for
undergraduates according to _BusinessWeek_.[50]

The Department's blog, started in 2007, is known as Dipnote, and a Twitter
account is maintained with the same name. The internal wiki is Diplopedia. The
internal suggestion blog within State is called the Sounding Board[51] and
their internal professional networking software, "Corridor", is a
success.[52][53] Finally, State has embraced e-government, establishing in May
2009 the Virtual Student Federal Service (VSFS).[54]

In 2009, the State Department launched 21st century statecraft. The U.S.
Department of State's official explanation of 21st Century Statecraft is:
"complementing traditional foreign policy tools with newly innovated and
adapted instruments of statecraft that fully leverage the technologies of our
interconnected world."[55]

