The **University of Maryland, Baltimore County**[6] (often referred to as
**UMBC** ) is a public research university in Baltimore County, Maryland. It
has a fall 2018 enrollment of 13,767 students, 48 undergraduate majors, over
60 graduate programs (36 master, 24 doctoral, and 17 graduate certificate
programs) and the first university research park in Maryland.[7]

Established as a part of the University of Maryland System in 1966, the
university became the first public collegiate institution in Maryland to be
inclusive to all races.[8] UMBC has the fourth highest enrollment of the
University System of Maryland, specializing in natural sciences and
engineering, as well as programs in the liberal arts and social sciences.[9]
Athletically, the UMBC Retrievers have 17 NCAA Division I teams that
participate in the America East Conference.[3]

The planning of the University of Maryland, Baltimore County was first
discussed in the 1950s due to the post-World War II baby boom, the expansion
of higher education under the GI Bill, and the large amount of growth both in
population and industry in the Baltimore-Washington Metropolitan Area. At this
time, the University of Maryland, College Park was the main higher education
source in the region, so talks began of adding a branch campus in the
Baltimore area. In 1955, Governor Theodore McKeldin issued "The Needs of
Higher Education in Maryland," which recommended the need for university
expansion. Three years later, the "Advisory Committee on Higher Education in
the State of Maryland" report proposed that the Baltimore branch of the
University of Maryland be established as a two-year program, subordinate to
the College Park campus.[10] In 1960, the Warfield Commission, appointed by
Governor Tawes, issued, "A Plan for Expanding the University of Maryland,"
which propelled the idea of creating three additional university centers
throughout Maryland.

In 1963, the Maryland Legislature approved the development of several new
universities throughout Maryland. By the end of that year, 435 acres were
purchased from Spring Grove State Hospital, a psychiatric facility in
Catonsville, Maryland. The new campus would be efficiently located in
Southwestern Baltimore, and would be able to be accessed from Wilkens Avenue,
the Baltimore Beltway and Interstate 95. Architectural design and planning of
the new campus was completed at the University of Maryland, College Park. In
1965, Albin Owings Kuhn, an accomplished administrator and professor at
College Park was named Vice President of Baltimore Campuses, including both
UMBC and the founding campus, University of Maryland, Baltimore. The new
campus also included Dr. Homer Schamp of the College Park as the first Dean of
Faculty, David Lewis as the first full-time faculty member and head of Social
Sciences, and John Haskell, Jr. as the first Librarian.[10]

The first classes began on September 19, 1966 with 750 students, 3 buildings,
and the older wing of the Biological Sciences building, 45 faculty members, 35
support staff, and 500 parking spaces.[11] As university enrollment increased
drastically over the coming years, the university would also coincide with the
turbulent changes in society in the 1960s. While undergoing the Civil rights
movement and the Vietnam War, UMBC would prove to be a new and different
atmosphere with open and peaceful minds during campus protests.[12] In 1971,
Albin Owings Kuhn resigned his position as UMBC's first chancellor, succeeded
by Calvin B. T. Lee. Five years later in 1976, John Dorsey, Administrative
Vice President at the University of Maryland, College Park was appointed as
UMBC's third Chancellor.[10]

By 1980, undergraduate enrollment reached 5,800 students. Also in this year,
Homecoming and Quadmania were established as cornerstone events that would
become UMBC tradition for years to come. During this decade, the University
Center and Sherman Hall were opened, as well as Hillside and Terrace
Apartments. In addition, University of Maryland, College Park alum Jim Henson
funds the establishment of the Imaging Research Center at UMBC. In 1986,
Michael Hooker becomes chancellor until 1992 when he moves to president of the
University of Massachusetts system. In 1988, a proposed merger of UMBC with
the University of Baltimore was considered but was voted down by the
University System of Maryland Board of Regents.[10]

In 1990, undergraduate enrollment reached over 10,000 students. In 1991, a
merger plan between UMBC and the University of Maryland, Baltimore was
approved in the Maryland House of Delegates, but was rejected by the Senate.
Throughout the last decade of the twentieth century, the university opened the
Engineering and Computer Science Building and Potomac Hall. The current
university president, Freeman A. Hrabowski III was appointed in 1992.[10]

The first decade of the twenty-first century featured many university
developments as UMBC approached its fortieth anniversary in 2006. Some of
these developments included the establishment of the Center for Urban
Environmental Research and Education, a new partnership with the NASA Goddard
Space Flight Center to develop the Goddard Earth Science and Technology (GEST)
Center, as well as numerous expansions to the campus such as the University
Commons, the Physics Building, Information Technology & Engineering Building
and the Public Policy Building.[13] During this time, UMBC was recognized by
the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB) for being
the leading producers of chemistry and biochemistry degrees, and was
classified by The Carnegie Foundation as being among the top tier research
universities, Doctoral/Research Universities for achieving 50 or more doctoral
degrees per year across at least 15 disciplines.[13]

UMBC offers undergraduate and graduate degree programs in a variety of areas
of study. There are 48 majors, 38 minors, 25 certificate and 13 Pre-
Professional programs offering in its undergraduate program. UMBC's Graduate
School offers 36 master's degree programs, 24 doctoral degree programs and 17
graduate certificate programs.,[14] The university is divided into three
colleges, two schools, as well as its graduate school. Alumni students are
allowed to readmit to undergraduate programs and only need to satisfy core
classes in order to obtain a second bachelor's degree. However, not all
programs and departments are applicable in readmitting as their course work
can require lengthy prerequisites.

UMBC is among the fastest-growing research universities in the country and is
classified as a Research University with Higher Research Activity by the
Carnegie Foundation.[22] The university consistently ranks among the top 200
U.S. institutions in research and development expenditures. UMBC's research
strengths include environmental sciences, high-performance computation, life
sciences, public policy and social sciences.[22]

The university is ranked among the Top 20 US universities in NASA funding.
UMBC's NASA-funded centers at NASA Goddard include the Joint Center for Earth
Systems Technology (JCET), the Goddard Planetary Heliophysics Institute
(GPHI), and the Center for Research and Exploration in Space Science and
Technology (CRESST).[22] In March 2017, CRESST received $87.5 M in funding
from NASA Goddard for space research.[23]

Faculty at UMBC have secured 27 National Science Foundation CAREER Awards
since 1995. Over the past decade, two UMBC researchers have received the
Presidential Early Career Award in Science and Engineering (PECASE)- one from
NSF in 2005 and one from NSA in 2014. UMBC also has one of only two Howard
Hughes Medical Institute investigators at a public university in Maryland, a
National Academy of Sciences member, as well as a DARPA Young Faculty Award
winner, and NASA's 2012 Distinguished Public Service Medal recipient.[22] UMBC
faculty have also received Fulbright and Guggenheim fellowships.[24][25]

bwtech@UMBC, UMBC's research park, houses three incubators in cybersecurity,
life sciences, and clean technology.[26] Additionally, UMBC has 20 campus-wide
centers and institutes, including the Center for Urban Environmental Research
and Education (CUERE), The Hilltop Institute, the Institute of Marine and
Environmental Technology (IMET), the Maryland Institute for Policy Analysis
and Research (MIPAR), the Center for Advanced Sensor Technology (CAST), the
Center for Art, Design & Visual Culture (CADVC), the Imaging Research Center
(IRC) and the UMBC Center for Cybersecurity.[27]

In 1840, the state of Maryland purchased the land that the university is
located on today. At that time, it was known as the Stabler Estate, owned by
the prominent Stabler family of Baltimore County.[28] James P. Stabler, the
chief engineer and superintendent of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad was
connected to the estate. The Baltimore Trade School, an orphan's home located
on present day Giffen Hill, was established in that same year.[28] The school
continued to operate and farm the surrounding acreage up until World War II.
The state later added the property to Spring Grove State Hospital, who farmed
the land until the university's establishment. A few of the original
structures were still in use by UMBC for some time, including the Hillcrest
Building and a farmhouse. Located off of Walker Avenue, the Hillcrest Building
was originally built in 1921 to house patients of Spring Grove State
Hospital.[29] The building was historically significant for it was the "first
building constructed specifically for the care and treatment of mentally ill
prisoners to be built at a state psychiatric hospital anywhere in the United
States".[30] In 1965, the structure was used as UMBC's administration
building, and later used as the office of residential life and a student
union. A common campus urban legend claims that the man that Hannibal Lecter
was based on lived in a basement cell of the building.[31] Hillcrest was
demolished in 2007 due to toxicity concerns, leaving the farm silo on UMBC
Boulevard to be oldest surviving structure on the university's campus.

Opened for enrollment in 1966, UMBC was created to serve the overflow of
students from the Baltimore area seeking admission to University of Maryland,
College Park. From its beginning, the new commuter campus faced a surfeit of
problems. Sited on free land taken from a state hospital, the campus was not
sponsored or protected by any political constituency. There were already nine
other campuses in the metropolitan area. Located a few miles from the
University of Maryland, Baltimore campus, there was no chance UMBC could
develop the array of professional schools common to research universities. Its
County name, an afterthought, was more consistent with two-year schools than a
Ph.D. - granting institution. Yet as UMBC continues past its 50th anniversary,
it has become a national role model for new American universities. The book-
length history _Improbable Excellence: the Saga Of UMBC_ chronicles this
development.[32]

UMBC's main entrance is approached from Metropolitan Boulevard where there is
a UMBC Campus exit that leads to UMBC Boulevard. Soon after the campus exit,
UMBC Boulevard intersects Research Park Drive which leads into UMBC's Research
& Technology Park. UMBC's campus is also served by Wilkens Avenue, which
provides access to the Baltimore Beltway and Rolling Road. Entrances off of
Wilkens Avenue include Hilltop Road and Walker Avenue. Hilltop Road leads
towards Catonsville's Business District on Frederick Road and Spring Grove
Hospital Center. On the other side of the campus, Poplar Avenue gives direct
access to Arbutus's Business District on East Drive. The campus core is served
by Hilltop Circle, which creates a complete circle encompassing the campus.

Academic Row is known to be the central pedestrian concourse and maintenance
vehicle highway in the campus that borders along a series of buildings.
Beginning south at Administration Drive, the pathway is covered by mature
trees on either side. Friendly squirrels are a common sight near the
University Center where students tend to feed them waffle fries from Chick-
fil-A.[34] Academic Row is bordered by the Administration Building, the
Retriever Activities Center, Janet and Walter Sondheim Hall, Sherman Hall
(Previously named Academic IV), University Center, Math and Psychology
Building, Biological Sciences Building, and the Meyerhoff Chemistry Building.
At the northern end, the walkway is intersected by Schwartz Breezeway leading
to the Commons, the university's student union. Academic Row terminates at the
Albin O. Kuhn Library & Gallery, where multiple paths radiate across Erickson
Field towards the Commons, the Physics and Public Policy Buildings, West
Hills, Hillside, and Terrace Apartments, as well as additional
dormitories.[35]

Taking any of the tree-lined staircases to the next level of campus leads to
the ITE, Engineering, and Fine Arts buildings, all of which can also be
accessed though shortcuts from any of the multitude of buildings on Academic
Row. As of 2015, the new Performing Arts and Humanities building has also been
servicing students, which is another short walk up from the Engineering
building. New lots have also been constructed outside of the Performing Arts
and Humanities building in order to accommodate more commuter students and
faculty. Fall of 2015 brings with it two new roundabouts that have been made
at the intersection of Administration Drive and Research Park Drive and
between Research Park Drive and the entrance ramp on to I-95.

On the southern side of the Commons, a large grassy area known as the Quad is
where many student events and activities take place throughout the school
year. Another area of student congregation is at UC Plaza in front of the
University Center. The University Center houses multiple dining options, the
UC Ballroom, as well as additional university event and teaching space.[36]

Administration Building

Library Pond

Performing Arts and Humanities Building

Joseph Beuys Sculpture Park

Information Technology and Engineering Building

Physics Building

UMBC's campus is located on 500 acres. It is approximately 15 minutes from
Baltimore's Inner Harbor and 60 minutes from Washington, D.C. It is also 45
minutes away from Frederick, Maryland. Baltimore-Washington International
Airport is five minutes away, as well as AMTRAK and Baltimore Light Rail
stations (BWI Airport and BWI Business District). In addition, the MARC Penn
Line serves the UMBC population at Halethorpe Station, which is located
approximately two miles away on Southwestern Boulevard in Arbutus, Maryland.
The Halethorpe/Satellite bus transit line transports students to and from the
train station. UMBC, three miles outside the Baltimore city limits,
successfully lobbied the government to use 'Baltimore' as its address. While
its suburban campus has minimal interaction with its surroundings, students
variously consider it to be located in the towns of Catonsville (by CDP) or
Arbutus (whose street grid it borders). The campus is undercut by a series of
underground tunnels.

Originally UMBC was supposed to be located in Baltimore City. However, due to
many disputes the university is located in the neighborhood of Southern
Catonsville, 1.5 miles south of Catonsville's Central Business District along
Frederick Road. Catonsville provides a College town atmosphere for UMBC by
having numerous restaurants, bars, and other conveniences. The town also
provides festivals and farmers markets every Sunday from May to November.[37]

UMBC Research and Technology Park is a 71-acre development on the campus
hosting technology, bioscience and research organizations, many of which are
engaged in partnership with the university.[38] The research park, split into
two campuses, is the oldest university research park in Maryland. The North
Campus focuses primarily on cybersecurity, and includes the Cyber Incubator
and a new addition of the CyberHive. The South Campus is a life-science and
business incubator, and has graduated over 50 companies through its program.
Research Park tenants include the US Geological Survey, US Forestry Service,
CardioMed Device Consultants, Audacious Inquiry, Med-IQ, Physician Practice,
Inc., Retirement Living TV, Ascentium Corporation, Solvern Innovations, RMF
Engineering, Inc., Convergent Technology, Clear Resolution Consulting,
Fearless Solutions, Potomac Photonics, and Next Breath.[39]

UMBC has several bus shuttle lines that are available to UMBC's students,
faculty, and staff. All but the Wave 'n Ride are free by showing of one's
campus identification card. The Wave-n-Ride was historically available to
anyone who needs intracampus transport around Hilltop Circle and UMBC
Boulevard, but the service is pending decommission.

In August 2014, service has expanded to two new lines connect the campus to
Downtown Baltimore.[40] These two lines (Downtown A-B Lines) also connect the
campus to the Baltimore Metro Subway byway of Lexington Market Station. The
Downtown B Line connects to the Metro as well as MARC Train at Camden Station,
and the Baltimore Light Rail byway of Convention Center Station.[41]

The Maryland Transit Administration offers additional service to the
University of Maryland Baltimore County community. Bus lines 35, 77, and 95
offer service to the campus. The MARC Train provides Penn Line rail service
two miles from the campus at Halethorpe station, connecting the university to
Baltimore and Washington.

The UMBC campus is home to a number of trails for pedestrians and bicyclists
as well. Some of these pathways include a walking bridge and path that
connects the central campus to the Research Park to the south, as well as an
unpaved path from UMBC Boulevard to Selford Road that is frequented by runners
and joggers. Nearby, the Short Line Railroad Trail can be accessed through
Hilltop Road and Spring Grove Hospital Center. The rail trail provides paved
pathway access from Downtown Catonsville and Paradise, crossing the Baltimore
Beltway. Additionally, cyclists have on-road bike routes from the campus to
Halethorpe station via Downtown Arbutus.[42]

UMBC maintains a 24-hour police staff of sworn officers, supplemented by non-
sworn security officers and student marshals. Like the campus police of the
University of Maryland, College Park and the University of Maryland,
Baltimore, the campus police are accredited by the Commission on Accreditation
for Law Enforcement Agencies.[43][44] Accreditation is expected by the
University System of Maryland mandated 2013 deadline.[ _citation needed_ ] The
UMBC police logs all crime reports and statistics as required by law on the
UMBC Police Webpage.[45]

In May 1992, Freeman A. Hrabowski III began his term as president of the
University of Maryland, Baltimore County. He was named by TIME Magazine as one
of the "100 Most Influential People in the World",[46] and for his work with
UMBC was honored[ _by whom?_ ] as America's Top 10 College Presidents in
2009.[ _citation needed_ ] Under his leadership, UMBC has been ranked the #1
Up and Coming University in the USA for six consecutive years (2009, 2010,
2011, 2012, 2013, and 2014) by U.S. News and World Report magazine.[47][
_failed verification_ ] His research and publications are more focused on
science and math education, with particular emphasis on minority participation
and performance.

The Meyerhoff Scholarship Program at UMBC is a program focused on the
cultivation of underrepresented minority scholarship and awareness in the
math, science, and engineering disciplines. Other scholarship programs include
the CWIT Scholars Program, the Humanities Scholars Program, the Dresher
Humanities Fellowships, Honors College Fellowships, the Linehan Artist
Scholars Program, the Sondheim Public Affairs Scholars Program and the Sherman
Teacher Education Scholars Program. Students can also receive scholarships
through the athletic department, after being recruited to play on a sports
team at UMBC. The Linehan Artist Scholars Program is a four-year scholarship
program for incoming freshmen with a major in the arts, including dance,
music, performing arts, visual arts, and theater. The artists learn to work
together and collaborate on projects, under the direction of Doug Hamby.

UMBC's Grand Challenge Scholars Program is designed for students from all
majors who are interested in solving important societal problems. The program
fosters a vibrant interdisciplinary community to help tackle the National
Academy of Engineering's (NAE) Grand Challenges, and gives students
experiences and skills to create solutions to some of the most pressing
challenges of the 21st century.

USNWR graduate school rankings[56]

The university is ranked tied for 166th in the 2020 _U.S. News& World Report_
rankings of "National Universities" in the United States, and is ranked tied
for 79th nationally among public universities. It was ranked 12th nationally
in undergraduate teaching and 9th in innovation.[57]. UMBC ranks fourth among
U.S. research universities in the production of IT degrees and certificates,
according to U.S. Department of Education data. The data shows UMBC ranking
#21 in MS, and #31 in PhD IT degree production.[58]

In 2012, _U.S. News & World Report_ rated UMBC as the 12th most under-
performing university, citing a gap between academic reputation and
performance in the academic indicators.[59] The Carnegie Foundation classifies
UMBC as a research university with high research activity.[60]

UMBC is one of 50 public institutions in the United States recognized by _The
Princeton Review_ as a "Best Value College" offering a combination of
educational excellence and affordability. For the past 17 years, UMBC has been
named one of America's top 5 "Up-and-Coming" national universities by _U.S.
News and World Report_. In 2014, for the 6th year in a row, UMBC has been
named #1 Up-and-Coming national university.[ _citation needed_ ]

UMBC has received a high rating of 4 out of 5 from Campus Pride, an LGBT-
friendly campus climate index.[61]

The university has formed a variety of centers and institutes. It has a
partnership with NASA. The Center for Space Science and Technology, Goddard
Earth Sciences and Technology Center, and the Joint Center for Earth Systems
Technology all are affiliated with the Goddard Space Flight Center in
Greenbelt, Maryland, and share collaboration efforts with the University of
Maryland, College Park.

In 2014, the university signed agreements with the United States Army Research
Laboratory and the United States Army Research, Development and Engineering
Command,[62][63] for research in information systems, computer science,
cybersecurity, networks, sensors, communications, mathematics and statistics,
human dimensions, human systems integration, synthetic biology, power, quantum
information processing, natural language processing and robotics.[63]

USB and the University of Maryland, Baltimore (UMB) jointly operate the
Research & Innovation Partnership Seed Grant program, which aims to promote
inter-institutional research collaborations between the two USM institutions
and to stimulate joint grant proposals to federal agencies and
foundations.[64] This shared program allows students and faculty to receive
grants for research, increased collaboration, as well as the ability to use
the facilities of both universities.

In February 2015, UMBC formed another partnership with Kyushu University in
Fukuoka, Japan, for research in computer security.[65]

Furthermore, in the spring of 2015 an array of partnerships between UMBC and
the US Navy were announced. The two announced the opening of the first Naval
ROTC unit in Maryland, on the campus of UMBC, with the US Navy sponsoring a
multitude of four year full-ride scholarships for select candidates.[66] In
addition, a cybersecurity research partnership between the two institutions
was announced, beginning with five collaborative research projects between
UMBC faculty and students and the US Navy.[67]

In 1997, President Freeman Hrabowski created the Conservation and
Environmental Research Areas of UMBC also known as _CERA_ on the south end of
the campus. The conservation area encompasses 50 acres surrounding Pig Pen
Pond and Bwtech@UMBC Research and Technology Park. At the same time as
preserving the land, CERA allowed UMBC students to use the land for
educational and recreational purposes. CERA contains two parts. The larger
tract, covering approximately 45 acres of the south end of the main campus,
contains a wide variety of ecological conditions: mature upland forest, early-
and mid- successional forest, and riparian and wetland environments. The
second, area is much smaller, with an area of about 3 acres. This surrounds
Pigpen Pond, which was once actually a pigpen until it filled with water.
There are also several areas within CERA where evidence of previous human
occupancy and use can be found. In addition to teaching opportunities for
faculty, CERA offers a wide range of opportunities for students and faculty to
undertake short and long term research projects in a variety of disciplines.
Management of CERA is guided by the need to maintain these landscapes as
natural areas to be preserved and protected for approved uses in education,
research and wildlife observation.[68]

In 2007, President Freeman Hrabowski signed on to the American College and
University President's Climate Commitment (ACUPCC) and formed the Climate
Change Task Force. 20% of the university's emissions comes from renewable
energy.[69] Additional sustainable efforts include a green roof on Patapsco
Hall, and the construction of new LEED certified buildings such as West Hills
Community Center and the Performing Arts and Humanities Building. Preservation
has also been a growing focus for UMBC, through the creation of CERA,
Conservation Environmental Research Area. "No-mow zones" and stormwater
retention ponds have also been added to the campus.[70]

In 2013, UMBC earned Tree Campus USA recognition by the Arbor Day
Foundation.[71]

In May 2014, UMBC dedicated 11 acres on the northeastern side of the campus
for preservation through the Maryland Department of Natural Resources.[72]
Also in 2014, the university has opened its first community garden for its
students.[73] The garden will give students the chance to grow their own food
on campus.

In May 2015, two Prove It![74] teams went on to win the $10,000 grant for
their sustainability driven ideas to improve the life of students. The first,
Retriever Treasure, collects unwanted furniture, clothes, and other items from
students moving out of dorms and apartments at the end of each school year.
They then resell these items at the beginning of the school year to raise
funds for other initiatives and donate the remainder of the items not sold.
The second, SolarRetrievers,[75] raised an additional $30,000 from UMBC
Residential Life, Facilities Management, and The Commons to purchase 4
EnerFusion Solar Power-Dok solar tables. These tables promote the idea of
sustainable energy by directly demonstrating how solar panels are used to
charge a battery and power devices in areas that normally would not have
electricity readily available. The tables are located in the courtyard between
Harbor and Chesapeake Hall, The Commons terrace, and two are on the terrace
outside of the Retriever Activities Center.

The Chesapeake Bay Retriever is the state dog of Maryland and has been the
mascot of UMBC since weeks after its founding in 1966.[76] The costumed mascot
was alternately known as "Fever the Retriever" in the late 1990s. The
university also once had a live mascot, upon whom the True Grit statue is
based, named Campus Sam.[77] At the beginning of the 2008 fall semester, a
Chesapeake Bay retriever puppy was chosen as a new mascot. He attends many
athletic events and an online poll was held on the Retriever Activities Center
website to choose his name, which was ultimately decided as "Gritty". The
school's dining hall is named True Grits.

True Grit appears in two forms: Both as a statue in front of the Retriever
Activities Center of a Chesapeake Bay retriever and as a costumed mascot, an
anthropomorphized Chesapeake Bay retriever. The latter can typically be seen
in attire of whatever sport he is currently attending; this is most often
basketball or lacrosse. As part of an art installation, there are also several
smaller True Grit statues placed around campus, all given themed decoration by
various student artists.

A new tradition has begun on campus of rubbing the nose of the True Grit
statue for good luck after orientation into the university.

The Resident Student Association and Student Events Board provide social
programming during all academic semesters at UMBC. Over 220 student-run
organizations exist on campus.[78]

This unique interdisciplinary doctoral program draws upon faculty from
disciplines in the humanities and social sciences from eight departments and
programs at UMBC: African Studies; American Studies; Education; English;
History; Gender and Women's Studies; Modern Languages, Linguistics and
Intercultural Communication; and Sociology and Anthropology.[79]

A living learning community (LLC) is essentially themed housing. A hallway of
one of UMBC's residence halls is set aside for students who share a certain
academic ground. LLCs are intended to provide residents with social, academic,
and career opportunities related to their theme. Many sponsor a one credit
course in which students are required to enroll.[80]

UMBC has eight LLCs, listed below.

The Center for Women in Technology LLC houses women and men who major in
engineering or information technology, with the special intention of providing
a community for females in this traditionally male dominated academic area. It
offers academic, social, and career opportunities.[80]

The Discovery Scholars LLC helps students of an undecided career path explore
possible majors and careers. Participants must enroll in its sponsored one
credit course. Discovery Scholars are provided with social excursions, career
exploration services, academic advising.[80]

The Honors College LLC houses members of UMBC's honors college, providing an
environment for socialization outside the classroom. Graduates of the Honors
program must earn an "A" or "B" in special honors-level courses in various
categories of academic disciplines. It is located in Susquehanna Hall.[80]

The Humanities Floor LLC is composed of students interested in—though not
necessarily majoring in—the humanities. It facilitates intelligent discussion
and field trips related to the humanities. Residents must attend four
sponsored events and assist in planning floor activities. Many of the accepted
Humanities Scholars choose to reside on the Humanities Floor LLC. The students
who live on the floor find a community of like-minded scholars to study with
and join in social activities with.[80]

The Intercultural Living Exchange LLC aims to promote cultural diversity.
Residents are mentored by international students and participate in social
events centered around cultural items, such as holidays, movies, or cuisine.
Students earn academic credit for participating in this LLC. Students can
participate in language immersion and live with others who are studying
French, Spanish, Korean, or Chinese.[80]

The Shriver Living-Learning Center LLC is centered around service learning.
Students build leadership skills by volunteering three to five hours weekly.
They are required to take the LLC's sponsored academic course. Residents also
hear presentations from guest speakers and give presentations on their own
service experiences. Students are able to earn academic credit for their
participation.[80]

The Visual and Performing Arts LLC provides students interested in the arts
chances to deepen their experience of the arts through learning new skills,
holding intelligent discussions, and attending relevant events.[80]

The Women Involved in Learning and Leadership LLC is intended to promote
leadership skills in social issues. Residents hear speakers, activists, and
organizations involved in social change as well as plan and attend related
events. Though not its sole focal points, feminism and gender issues
predominate this LLC.[80]

The STEM LLC is UMBC's tenth and largest LLC, and as of Fall 2016 houses 75
students. The STEM LLC is intended for first and second year students at UMBC
majoring in STEM. Residents have access to Peer Mentors that are exclusive to
the STEM LLC, resources through the College of Natural and Mathematical
Sciences, and different seminars that assist residents with deepening their
understanding and knowledge of STEM.[80]

The Student Events Board, stylized as (seb), is the major programming
organization on campus. They host approximately 150 events a semester that are
diverse, fun, and often free. The spring festival on campus, Quad Mania, is
hosted entirely by (seb).

UMBC holds homecoming in the fall semester, usually during the month of
October. Homecoming consists of numerous activities and festivities on campus.
Namely, Homecoming includes the 5K Dawg Chase race, and a comedy show.[81]
Past performances include Jim Gaffigan, B.J. Novak, Nick Offerman, Bo Burnham,
and others.

During the spring semester, Quad Mania serves as the university's student
festival. The event usually takes place during April outdoors in The Quad, the
central quadrangle of the campus next to the Commons. The headliner for the
spring of 2012 was Gym Class Heroes.[82] The headliner for the spring of 2013
was Macklemore & Ryan Lewis and that for the spring of 2014 was Capital
Cities.[83] The 2014 Quad Mania was also to have elephant rides, but these
were allegedly cancelled due to claims of animal cruelty by some students. In
2015, Kesha performed at the Retriever Activities Center.[84] In spring of
2016, Fetty Wap headlined Quad Mania on April 24.[85] In the spring of 2017,
T-Pain returned to UMBC and headlined the event.[86]

UMBC has 20 officially registered sororities and fraternities with nearly 5%
of UMBC's undergraduate students belonging to one of them, as well as one
professional fraternal organization. UMBC houses four Greek councils, (NPHC,
PHA, MGC, IFC).[87] UMBC is home to 5 PHA organizations, which include Alpha
Sigma Alpha, Alpha Sigma Kappa, Delta Phi Epsilon, Phi Mu, and Phi Sigma
Sigma. The IFC organizations represented on campus are Lambda Chi Alpha, Pi
Kappa Phi, Tau Kappa Epsilon, Phi Kappa Sigma, and Triangle. The NPHC
currently houses the organizations Alpha Phi Alpha, Alpha Kappa Alpha, Delta
Sigma Theta, Phi Beta Sigma. Their Multicultural Greek Council currently
consists of Lambda Theta Alpha, alpha Kappa Delta Phi, Zeta Sigma Chi, Iota Nu
Delta, and Lambda Phi Epsilon.[88]

There are ten housing areas housing approximately 3,900 students, which are:
Potomac Hall, Chesapeake Hall, Erickson Hall, Harbor Hall, Patapsco Hall,
Susquehanna Hall, Hillside Apartments, Terrace Apartments, Walker Avenue
Apartments, West Hill Apartments.[89]

Those building types denoted "Hall" are traditional dormitories with the
following typifying characteristics:

Those denoted "Apartments" are distinct in the following ways:

All apartment buildings in the West Hill region will be under renovation in
the Fall of 2014, excepting Severn and Chester.[90]

Many university students often live off campus to neighboring communities.
This is supported by the UMBC Transit lines serving these neighborhoods.[91]
Popular locations for students include Catonsville and Arbutus. Popular
apartment complexes include the Westland Garden Apartment & Town homes, and
the Colony Hill Apartments located 1.5, and 2.5 miles away from campus,
respectively. Students also live in numerous Baltimore City neighborhoods such
as Beechfield, Oaklee, Irvington, Yale Heights, and Edmondson.[92]

UMBC has won the Pan American Chess Tournament 9 times in 13 years
(1996–2009). The school provides substantial chess scholarships to outstanding
high school graduate players at the International or Grandmaster level. Former
UMBC team captain GM Alexander Onischuk has gone on to become US Champion in
2006.[ _citation needed_ ] Professor of Computer Science Alan Sherman has been
instrumental in building up the UMBC chess dynasty by recruiting players from
around the world. UMBC hosts two annual open chess tournaments, the UMBC Open
(March) and the UMBC Championship (September).[93]

The school's sports teams are called the Retrievers, with colors black and
gold. The mascot of the university is the Chesapeake Bay Retriever, the state
dog of Maryland, named True Grit. A statue of True Grit stands in front of the
Retriever Activities Center (RAC). The Retrievers participate in NCAA Division
I as a member of the America East Conference, fielding 17 varsity sports;
eight men's and nine women's. The Retrievers fight song is the UMBC Riser, and
was written by Dr. George LaNoue, a professor of policy sciences.

Until 2017, the UMBC Women's Volleyball team has participated in the America
East tournament every year since 2008. In 2013 the team became a runner-up
after losing to University of New Hampshire.

In 2007, UMBC's women's basketball team won the schools first ever women's
basketball title. They were invited to the 2007 NCAA tournament where they
fought hard against UConn. The UMBC women's basketball team also won the AEC
conference title in the 2011–2012 season. They were invited to the WNIT where
they fell short to the University of Florida.

The Retrievers won their first regular season American East Men's Basketball
title in 2007–08, and also qualified for their first NCAA Division I Men's
Basketball Tournament. They had previously competed in the Division II men's
basketball tournament.

In 2009, the men's lacrosse team secured their fifth consecutive outright or
shared America East regular season championship and their third America East
tournament championship in four years. UMBC has secured a berth in the NCAA
tournament each of the past four seasons.[94][95] In 2007, the unseeded
Retrievers upset seventh-seeded Maryland, 13–9, in the NCAA tournament to
advance to the Division I second round for the first, and so far only, time in
school history.[96]

In 2010, a contest was launched to find a new logo for Athletics.[97] In May
2010, the UMBC Athletic Department unveiled a new logo for the Retrievers
created by Jim Lord.

The Retrievers men's swimming and diving program captured its 15th straight
conference championship in the 2012–13 season. This streak included every
season the UMBC program had competed in the America East, starting with the
school's joining the conference in 2003–04 and ending when the America East
dropped the sport at the end of the 2012–13 school year. The streak of UMBC
conference titles in this sport did not continue in the CCSA.

In March 2016, UMBC announced that their new Men's Basketball coach would be
Ryan Odom. Parks Smith criticized the pick, saying that the search firm hired
had promoted a candidate more remarkable for his nepotistic ties than for
merit.[98]

With the master plan wrapping up in 2018, the school spent $67 million in
January 2016 on a new event center completed in Winter 2018. This new event
center is become home to athletic events such as basketball games, as well as
concerts.[99][100]

The Retrievers’ Men’s Basketball team made history on March 16, 2018 during
the 2018 NCAA Men’s Basketball Tournament by becoming the first No. 16 seed in
the history of the competition to defeat a No. 1 seed, defeating the Virginia
Cavaliers 74-54. They advanced to the round of 32 for the first time in school
history.[101]

The Retrievers Men's Soccer Team won the America East Conference in 2010,
receiving an automatic bid to the NCAA Division I men's soccer tournament. The
Retrievers won their first-round game against Princeton but lost in the second
round to William and Mary. Star striker, Levi Houapeu, from that 2010 team was
drafted as a 5th pick in the 3rd round of the 2011 MLS Superdraft by the
Philadelphia Union. He is the first UMBC player to be drafted into the MLS.[
_citation needed_ ] The men also won the conference again in 2012, and
advanced to the NCAA tournament once again. They won their first-round game
against Old Dominion, but lost in the second round to defending champion, UNC
Chapel Hill. In 2013 the Retrievers led the country in overall record (16-1-3)
and became the first team since 1997 to repeat as America East Conference
Champions. They would earn a #16 seed and a first round bye as well as host
UMBC's first ever NCAA Tournament match in any sport.[ _citation needed_ ] The
Retrievers would fall in the second round of the tournament to UConn. In 2014,
the Retrievers won their third straight America East Conference Championship
and advanced the furthest of any UMBC NCAA Division I team by beating the
#12-ranked Creighton, as the Retrievers reached the NCAA Men's Soccer
Championship semifinals.[ _citation needed_ ] UMBC is the first team in
tournament history to win four consecutive road games and to post shutouts in
four consecutive games.[102]

UMBC Women's Soccer Team went 13-5-2 in their 2013 season, tying for the
regular-season conference title then winning the conference tournament. This
was their first American East Conference title. They then made their first
NCAA tournament appearance in 2013, where they lost to #1-ranked VA Tech 2-0
in the first round. This was an amazing accomplishment considering the team
had a cumulative record of 3-39-9 in their previous three years.[103]

