The **University of New Orleans** , often referred to locally as **UNO** , is
a medium-sized, metropolitan, public research university located on the New
Orleans lakefront within New Orleans, Louisiana, United States. It is a member
of the University of Louisiana System and the Urban 13 association.

In the fall of 2011 the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools
Commission on Colleges gave approval for the University of New Orleans to join
the University of Louisiana System, concluding the five-month transition from
the Louisiana State University System since Act 419 of the 2011 Louisiana
Legislative Regular Session was signed into law in July 2011.

State Senator Theodore M. Hickey of New Orleans in 1956 authored the act which
established the University of New Orleans. At the time New Orleans was the
largest metropolitan area in the United States without a public university
though it had several private universities, such as Tulane (which was
originally a state-supported university before being privatized in 1884),
Loyola, and Dillard. The institution was a branch of Louisiana State
University, and as such was originally named **Louisiana State University in
New Orleans** or **LSUNO**. The UNO University Ballroom was named in Hickey's
honor late in 2014, more than two decades after his death.[5]

The university was built on the New Orleans Lakefront when the United States
Navy relocated Naval Air Station New Orleans. The Orleans Levee Board leased
the closed base to the LSU Board of Supervisors. The renovation went quicker
than expected. LSUNO opened for classes in 1958, two years ahead of schedule.
It was the first racially integrated public university in the South. For its
first five years, it was reckoned as an offsite department of the main campus
in Baton Rouge, and as such its chief administrative officer was originally
called a dean (1958-1961), then a vice president in charge (1961-1962). In
1962, the LSU System of Higher Education was established, and LSUNO became a
separate campus in that system. To signify that it was now a co-equal
institution with LSU, its chief executive's title was changed from "vice
president in charge" to "chancellor." After a decade of growth, the LSU Board
of Supervisors approved a name change to the current **University of New
Orleans.** Nearly fifty years later, in 2011, the University of New Orleans
was transferred from LSU to the University of Louisiana system, and its chief
executive's title was changed to "president."[6]

On August 29, 2005, the university suffered damage due to Hurricane Katrina.
The main campus is on relatively high ground and the damage was caused mostly
by winds, rain-driven-water, and human activity during the storm. (The
University was used as an evacuation point and staging area by the National
Guard.) A levee breach on the London Avenue Canal occurred just a few blocks
south of the main campus and caused the flooding of the first floor of the
Bienville Hall dormitories, the Lafitte Village couples apartments, and the
Engineering Building.

UNO was the first of the large, damaged universities in New Orleans to re-
open, albeit virtually, by using web-based courses starting in October
2005.[7] The university was able to offer classes in the fall semester
immediately following Hurricane Katrina at satellite campuses; the main campus
re-opened in December 2005.

Hurricane Katrina reduced enrollments at all colleges in New Orleans, but the
University of New Orleans was particularly hard hit. This echoed the damage to
New Orleans as a whole, since UNO serves as a leader in educating students
from New Orleans. Since the hurricane, the student enrollment is on a steady
increase toward pre-Katrina numbers. In 2011, State Senator Conrad Appel of
Jefferson Parish, with the support of Governor Bobby Jindal, tried to combine
UNO with the historically black Southern University at New Orleans as a way to
save higher education dollars. His plan was withdrawn in both houses of the
legislature because of a lack of support from his colleagues.

There are more than 120 registered clubs and organizations active at UNO,
including 15 fraternities and sororities.[8] UNO Student Government, is the
official student government association. Registered organizations are
separated into categories of either religious, honorary, political,
professional, social, service, organizations, or special interests.

The Driftwood is the UNO weekly newspaper and is published every Thursday.[9]
UNO also owns and operates WWNO, a local radio station.[10] WWNO began
transmitting in 1972.[10]

The Greek community at The University of New Orleans is composed of 16
organizations, governed by three councils.[11]

UNO has four colleges: College of Business Administration, College of Liberal
Arts, Education and Human Development, College of Engineering, and College of
Sciences. The university also offers a bachelor's degree in Interdisciplinary
Studies.

The university's campus is located in the New Orleans metropolitan area,
sitting on Lake Pontchartrain at the end of Elysian Fields Avenue and on the
former site of NAS New Orleans. The UNO Research and Technology Park is
located adjacent to campus on the former site of the Pontchartrain Beach
amusement park. The Kiefer UNO Lakefront Arena and Maestri Field at Privateer
Park, UNO's basketball and baseball facilities, are located at the corner of
Franklin Avenue and Leon C. Simon Boulevard.

The University of New Orleans currently has 14 varsity sports teams, and is a
Division I member of the NCAA (National Collegiate Athletic Association),
competing in the Southland Conference. UNO originally attempted to reclassify
to Division II's Gulf South Conference.[18] On February 1, 2011, Provost Joe
King submitted the Division II proposal to the LSU Board of Supervisors.[19]
Previously, UNO competed at the Division II level from 1969â€“1975.[20] On March
9, 2012, President Peter J. Fos announced that UNO plans to remain a member of
NCAA Division I, with potential homes being the Sun Belt or Southland
Conference.[21] On August 21, 2012, UNO announced that it would be joining the
Southland Conference, effective the 2013-2014 academic year.[22]

The official fight song of The University of New Orleans is "Let's hear it for
UNO."[23] The song was adopted after a competition in 1981. The winner was
Lois Ostrolenk.[23] Before this, the melody from William Tell Overture was
used. A variation of the overture is still played to honor this tradition.[23]

The University of New Orleans has many club sports provided by the Department
of Recreation and Intramural Sports. Club sports are available to all UNO
students who have an interest. Active club sports include:

The University of New Orleans Research and Technology Park is a research park
whose tenants collaborate with the university to conduct research, provide
training, and create education opportunities.[24] Tenants have many university
services provided to them, including the university library and recreational
facilities.[25]

