The **University of Louisiana at Lafayette** (also called **UL Lafayette** or
**UL** ) is a public research university in Lafayette, Louisiana. It has the
largest enrollment within the nine-campus University of Louisiana System and
has the second largest enrollment in Louisiana. As a nod to the Acadian French
heritage of many of its students, the school sometimes uses the alternate name
_**l'Université des Acadiens**_.

Founded in 1898 as an industrial school, the institution developed into a
four-year university during the twentieth century and became known by its
present name in 1999. UL Lafayette evolved into a national research university
as noted by its Carnegie R2 categorization as a "Doctoral University: Higher
Research Activity." It offers Louisiana's only Ph.D. in francophone studies,
Louisiana's only master's of informatics, and Louisiana's only industrial
design degree. The university has achieved several milestones in computer
science, engineering and architecture. It is also home to a distinct College
of the Arts.

The campus of the University of Louisiana at Lafayette is located in
Lafayette, Louisiana, a small city (CSA population of approx 620,000[14])
located in the south-central part of the state, the heartland of Cajun
culture. The major roads that border or intersect the main UL campus are
Johnston St, University Ave, Taft St and Lewis St. In addition, St. Mary St.
bisects the campus and Girard Park Dr. creates another border at its eastern
end.

A hallmark of the Main Campus is the numerous mature live oak trees dotted
throughout the campus. Of special note is the "Century Oaks," so called as
they were planted in the first years of the 20th century by the school's first
president: Edwin Stephens. These trees are located along University Ave. In
addition to the Main Campus, expansion has included two other areas located in
the near vicinity: "University Commons," which contains the school's athletic
complex, Greek housing, etc., as well as it's "Research Park."

The historic Main Campus area originally consisted of only 25 acres, and its
boundaries were Johnston Street, University Avenue, what is now Hebrard Blvd
and to approximately Lee Hall in the Quad. By the 1930s the campus had more
than doubled in size, to 60 acres, reaching to the newly constructed St Mary
Street to its south, and McKinley Street to its east. This area includes such
buildings/areas as: Martin Hall (Admin building), Girard Hall, Stephens
Memorial, the Arcade, the Quadrangle (the Quad), Rose Garden dormitories,
Judice-Rickles Halls, and Cypress Lake. Also, the two oldest extant buildings
on campus are located in this area: Foster Hall (1902) and DeClouet Hall
(1905).

The Quadrangle (Quad,) which was completely renovated in 2015 (providing new
walkways, landscaping and a fountain containing a 15-foot Fleur de Lis in its
center), serves as the ‘heart’ of the university. It is surrounded by Martin
Hall/FG Mouton Hall, as well as Moody, OK Allen, Lee, Broussard, Stephens,
Mouton, M. Doucet, and Foster Halls. Some of the highlights of the Quad are:

Located on the campus block bordered by Hebrard Blvd, University Ave and
McKinley St, the original Rose Garden was surrounded Baker-Huger, Randolph,
Evangeline, and Bonin Halls, which were all female only dormitories and
designed by A. Hays Town and completed in 1950. In 2011 Baker-Huger,
Evangeline and Bonin Halls were all demolished and were replaced with
expanded/state of the art co-ed dormitories, now known as the Rose Garden
complex.

The decades of the 1950–70s saw tremendous growth, both in the city of
Lafayette as well as the university. During that period the main campus again
expanded: to the east (Taft St), west (Rex St), and south (Lewis St) bringing
the total amount of acreage for the main campus to approx. 125 acres. Many new
academic buildings were located in this area including Dupre Library, HL
Griffin Hall (Liberal Arts), Billeaud Hall (Biology), Madison Hall
(Engineering), Wharton (Nursing), Angelle (Music), Fletcher
(Art/Architecture), etc.

In 2012, and as part of the selling of its “Horse Farm” property to the city
of Lafayette, the university acquired an additional 20 acres along the
Johnston/Lewis St corridor when the Youth Park/Dog Park was added to the main
campus. As of fall 2018, this area is being developed as housing for
upperclassmen, and is called the “Heritage at Cajun Village.” With the
addition of these 20 acres, the total acreage for the main campus is now at
145 acres.

The university is a member of the Southeastern Universities Research
Association and is categorized as a Carnegie Doctoral University: Higher
Research Activity.[23] The university has also recently exceeded $100 million
in research and development expenditures for the first time in its history,
spending $100.98 million in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2017. That amount
places the school among the top 25 percent of U.S. colleges and universities
in terms of research and development funding. It is the stated mission of UL's
Strategic Plan to reach Carnegie Classification Research 1 status by 2020;
surpassing the $100 million threshold is a major step in that direction. [24]
It should also be noted that the university receives more research money than
all of the other ULS schools, combined, and is rated one of the top 100 public
research universities in the nation according to a 2010 report by The Nelson
A. Rockefeller Institute of Government.[25] In 2012, it became the first
Louisiana university designated as an NSF Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center.[26] The Center for Visual and Decision Informatics is the
only NSF Center in the nation that focuses on data science, big data
analytics, and visual analytics.[27]

UL Lafayette's New Iberia Research Center in New Iberia conducts basic and
applied research on several species of nonhuman primates including macaques,
grivets, capuchins and chimpanzees.[28] Founded in 1984, the center now houses
over 6,500 monkeys used for breeding and studies.[29][30] The center is also a
contract breeding and testing facility, selling animals to other laboratories
and conducting experiments under contract with other parties.[31]

In 2008, the Humane Society of the United States conducted an undercover
investigation in the center which found monkeys being shot with sedation guns
while in their cages, one monkey repeatedly hit by a worker in the teeth with
a metal pole and another worker striking an infant monkey among other apparent
AWA violations.[32] In 2015, the U.S. Department of Agriculture cited the
center for six potential violations of the Animal Welfare Act (AWA) which the
government alleges lead to the death of one monkey, injuries to another and
the escape of five from their enclosure.[33] In the past decade, the center
has paid $58,633 in fines for successive AWA violations.[33]

In 2016, Project Chimps, a nonprofit organization, announced a partnership
with NIRC to relocate 220 of the university's retired research chimpanzees to
a sanctuary in northern Georgia.[34]

UL Lafayette is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and
Schools. All undergraduate programs at UL Lafayette that are eligible for
accreditation by professional agencies are accredited.[35] The University of
Louisiana at Lafayette Honors Program is an active member of the Louisiana,
Southern Regional, and National Honors Councils.[36] The university graduates
about 1,700 students each fall and spring.

The university offers more than 80 undergraduate degree programs, 27 master's
degree programs, and 10 Doctorate degree programs, which include Applied
language and Speech Sciences, Biology, Computer Engineering, Computer Science,
Earth and Energy Sciences, Educational Leadership, English, Francophone,
Mathematics, Nursing Practice, and Systems Engineering.

The university confers associate's, bachelor's and master's degrees through
its eight academic colleges:

University of Louisiana at Lafayette Press is the largest academic publisher
of Louisiana-related works and the second-largest academic publisher overall
in the state. UL Lafayette Press has been publishing since 1973 and previously
imprinted under the Center for Louisiana Studies prior to 2009.[50] The press
is the only press for the UL System and publishes works beyond the nine
campuses.

The journal _Louisiana History_ is published quarterly through UL Lafayette by
the Louisiana Historical Association. LHA was founded in New Orleans in 1889.

The center's research division houses the world's largest collection of Cajun
and Creole folklore, oral history, and folklife materials and some of the
nation's largest microfilm collections of French and Spanish colonial
records.[50]

Marais Press[51] began in the early 1990s. The first project was a book
featuring the work of the late Elemore Morgan Jr.,[52][ _circular reference_ ]
a Louisiana artist who taught at the University and received international
acclaim for his work as a painter and photographer. More than 200 visiting
artists from around the world participate for about a week residency to work
on their projects at Marais Press, a teaching and research hub. Artists help
train and mentor students, who get hands-on experience making lithographs,
woodcuts, silkscreen, and etchings."The artists collaborate with students, who
actually mix ink, print paper, the whole deal," said Brian Kelly,[53] an
artist, holds the University's Coca-Cola/BORSF Endowed Professorship and is a
UL Lafayette Distinguished Professor in the Department of Visual Arts serves
as Head of the Printmaking program and is Coordinator of Marais Press. Marais
Press is a separate entity from the UL Press, the publishing arm of UL
Lafayette's Center for Louisiana Studies.

UL Lafayette's students represent fifty-three states and possessions. More
than 700 come from outside the United States. A majority of international
students pursue master's degrees in petroleum engineering and computer
science. There are over 200 student organizations.[54]

The Louisiana Ragin' Cajun teams participate in NCAA Division I (I FBS for
football) in the Sun Belt Conference. The Ragin' Cajuns compete in 16 NCAA
sports teams (8 men's, 8 women's teams), including baseball, basketball (men's
and women's), cross country (men's and women's), football, softball, women's
soccer, women's volleyball, men's golf, tennis (men's and women's), and track
and field (men's and women's, indoor and outdoor).

The athletic program formally began in 1904 with a track and field
program.[55] In recent years, the softball team has been among the most
successful of all Ragin' Cajun teams, having won nine regular season
championships, nine conference tournament championships, and earning five
appearances in the Women's College World Series. The baseball, men's tennis,
men's basketball, and football teams have won conference championships.

In 2014, the Cajuns became the first in college football bowl history to win
the same bowl game in four straight seasons.[56] However, the university
vacated all of its 2011 wins, including the New Orleans Bowl, two years later
when the NCAA sanctioned the university because an assistant football coach
conspired to "obtain fraudulent entrance exam scores" for five recruits from
2011 until 2013.[57] The university dismissed the coach in 2014 and sued the
testing company in 2016 for failing to adequately supervise their staff and
testing procedures. The NCAA accepted the university's self-imposed penalties
including a two-year probation, a small fine, a small reduction in football
scholarships, and recruiting restrictions.[58]

The University of Louisiana at Lafayette is home to many alumni who have held
posts as business leaders, government officials, military officers, Olympic
and professional athletes, artists and entertainers. For example, from
literature: James Lee Burke, Pulitzer nominee, best known for his _Dave
Robicheaux_ series; from entertainment Marc Breaux, choreographer of movies
such as _Mary Poppins_ , _The Sound of Music_ , _Chitty Chitty Bang Bang_ and
Frank Ocean, Grammy award-winning singer, songwriter, and rapper, briefly a
student after Katrina drove him out of New Orleans; from government: Kathleen
Blanco, former Louisiana governor (2004–2008), John Breaux, former US senator
(1987–2005), Paul Hardy, former Lieutenant Governor of Louisiana, Jefferson
Caffery, former U.S. ambassador to El Salvador, Colombia, Cuba, Brazil,
France, and Egypt. Patrick Thomson Caffery, former United States
Representative (LA 3rd District 1969-1973)

Saad Khan from Mumbai, India, is a film director, screenwriter, acting
teacher, founder and creative head of Centerstage. He was selected as one of
the outstanding alumni of 2015 of the Department of Communication.

Two military alumni Charles B. DeBellevue and Jefferson J. DeBlanc were
recognized as flying aces; DeBlanc also was awarded the Medal of Honor.
Captain Steven L. Bennett was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor in 1974.
Ace Charles B. DeBellevue and Medal of Honor recipient Steven L. Bennett were
members of the ROTC program and both entered active duty with the Air Force
after graduating in 1968.

Distinguished faculty members have included John Kennedy Toole, Pulitzer
Prize-winning author of _A Confederacy of Dunces_ , and Ernest J. Gaines,
nominated for a Nobel Prize in Literature and a Pulitzer Prize for fiction,
Paul Prudhomme, American celebrity chef, Elemore Morgan, Jr., internationally
known landscape painter, and Burton Raffel, poet noted for his translation of
Cervantes's _Don Quixote_.

Several football alumni have played in the National Football League, including
Jake Delhomme (retired), Brian Mitchell (retired), Brandon Stokley (retired),
the late Minnesota Viking Orlando Thomas, Ike Taylor (retired), Charles
Tillman (retired) and Richie Cunningham (retired). Two alumni were inducted to
the College Football Hall of Fame: Chris Cagle and Weldon Humble.

Baseball alumni who played in the Major Leagues include Ron Guidry, retired
(New York Yankees), who won the 1978 American League Cy Young Award.

Basketball alumni who played in the National Basketball Association include
Elfrid Payton.

Kim Perrot played for the Houston Comets, helping them to win two WNBA
championships. Other alumni include Olympic track & field medalist Hollis
Conway and world-title trampolinist Leigh Hennessy, who holds the record for
winning the most US national championships for women.

Jake Delhomme, NFL quarterback who led the Carolina Panthers to their first
NFC conference championship.

Ali Landry, former Miss USA (1996), model and actress.

Alex McCool, manager of the Space Shuttle Projects Office at the NASA George
C. Marshall Space Flight Center.

Frank Ocean, Grammy award-winning artist, singer, songwriter, and rapper.

Coordinates: 30°12′45″N 92°01′09″W﻿ / ﻿30.2126°N 92.0193°W﻿ / 30.2126;
-92.0193

