The **University of Delaware** (colloquially **UD** or **Delaware** ) is a
public research university located in Newark, Delaware. The University of
Delaware is the largest university in Delaware. UD currently[ _when?_ ] offers
three associate's programs, 148 bachelor's programs, 121 master's programs
(with 13 joint degrees) and 55 doctoral programs across its eight colleges[6].
The main campus is in Newark, with satellite campuses in Dover, Wilmington,
Lewes, and Georgetown. It is considered a large institution with approximately
18,500 undergraduate and 4,500 graduate students. UD is a privately governed
university which receives public funding for being a land-grant, sea-grant and
space-grant state-supported research institution.[7]

UD is classified as a Doctoral University-Very High Research Activity (R1) by
the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education.[8] UD is one
of the top 100 public institutions for federal obligations[ _clarification
needed_ ] in science and engineering and interdisciplinary initiatives in
energy science and policy, the environment, and in human health.[9]

UD is recognized with the Community Engagement Classification by the Carnegie
Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching.[10]

It is one of only four schools in North America with a major in art
conservation. In 1923, UD was the first American university to offer a study-
abroad program.[11]

The school from which the university grew was founded in 1743, making it one
of the oldest in the nation. Its original class of ten students included
George Read, Thomas McKean, and James Smith, all three of whom would go on to
sign the Declaration of Independence; Read also signed the U.S. Constitution.
UD, however, was not chartered as an institution of higher learning until
1833.

The University of Delaware traces its origins to 1743, when Presbyterian
minister Francis Alison opened a "Free School" in his home in New London,
Pennsylvania.[12] During its early years, the school was run under the
auspices of the Philadelphia Synod of the Presbyterian Church. The school
changed its name and location several times. It moved to Newark by 1765 and
received a charter from the colonial Penn government as the Academy of Newark
in 1769. In 1781, the academy trustees petitioned the Delaware General
Assembly to grant the academy the powers of a college, but no action was taken
on this request.[13]

In 1818, the Delaware legislature authorized the trustees of the Newark
Academy to operate a lottery in order to raise funds with which to establish a
college.[14] Commencement of the lottery, however, was delayed until 1825, in
large part because some trustees, several of whom were Presbyterian ministers,
objected to involvement with a lottery on moral grounds.

In 1832, the academy trustees selected the site for the college and entered
into a contract for the erection of the college building. Construction of that
building (now called Old College) began in late 1832 or in 1833. On February
5, 1833, the Delaware legislature incorporated Newark College, which was
charged with instruction in languages, arts and sciences, and granted the
power to confer degrees. All the trustees of the academy became trustees of
the college, and the college absorbed the academy, with Newark Academy
becoming the preparatory department of Newark College.

Newark College commenced operations on May 8, 1834, with a collegiate
department and an academic department, both of which were housed in Old
College. In January 1835, the Delaware legislature passed legislation
specifically authorizing the Newark Academy trustees to suspend operations and
to allow the educational responsibilities of the academy to be performed by
the academic department of Newark College. If, however, the college ever
ceased to have an academic department, the trustees of the academy were
required to revive the academy.[15]

In 1841 and 1842 separate classroom and dormitory buildings were constructed
to teach and house academic department students. These buildings would later
form the east and west wings of the Newark Academy Building located at Main
and Academy Streets.

In 1843, the name of the college was changed to Delaware College.

The college was supported by a state authorized lottery until 1845. With the
loss of lottery proceeds, the college faced serious financial problems in the
late 1840s. A scholarship program was adopted to increase enrollment and
revenues. Although enrollment did increase to levels that would not be
surpassed until the 1900s, the plan was fiscally unsound, and the financial
condition of the school deteriorated further. After a student fracas in 1858
resulted in the death of a student, the college suspended operations in 1859,
although the academy continued to operate.

The Civil War delayed the reopening of the college. In 1867, college trustees
lobbied the Delaware legislature for Delaware College to be designated as
Delaware's land-grant college pursuant to the Morrill Land-Grant College
Act.[16] Introduced by Congressman Justin S. Morrill of Vermont in 1857 and
signed into law by President Abraham Lincoln in 1862, the Morrill Land-Grant
College Act granted public lands to each state in order to establish schools
to teach agriculture and engineering. On Jan. 12, 1869, the Board of Trustees
of Delaware College signed an agreement to become the state’s land-grant
institution. In exchange, the state received a one-half interest in the
property of the college and the authority to appoint half of the members of
the Board of Trustees. The Morrill Land-Grant College Act granted Delaware the
title to 90,000 acres in Montana which it sold and invested the profits into
bonds used to fund the college.

Delaware College's new status as a semipublic college led to the termination
of its official connection with the private academy. In 1869, the Newark
Academy was revived as a separate institution operating under the 1769
charter.

In 1870, Delaware College reopened. It offered classical, scientific and, as
required by its land-grant status, agricultural courses of study. In an effort
to boost enrollment, women were admitted to the college between 1872 and 1885.

It was not until 1914, though, that the Women's College opened on an adjoining
campus, offering women degrees in Home Economics, Education, and Arts and
Sciences. Brick archways at Memorial Hall separated the Men's and Women's
campuses and gave rise to the legend of the Kissing Arches (where students
would kiss good night before returning to their respective residence halls).

In 1921, Delaware College was renamed the University of Delaware, and it
officially became a coeducational institution in 1945 when it merged with the
Women's College of Delaware.[17]

The university grew rapidly during the latter half of the 20th century. After
World War II, UD enrollment skyrocketed, thanks to the G.I. Bill. In the late
1940’s, almost two-thirds of the students were veterans. Since the 1950s, UD
has quadrupled its enrollment and greatly expanded its faculty, its academic
programs and its research enterprise.

In 2010–11, the university conducted a feasibility study in support of plans
to add a law school focused on corporate and patent law.[18] At its
completion, the study suggested that the planned addition was not within the
university's funding capability given the nation's economic climate at the
time.[18] Capital expenses were projected at $100 million, and the operating
deficit in the first ten years would be $165 million. The study assumed an
initial class of two hundred students entering in the fall of 2015.[18]
Widener University has Delaware's only law school.[18]

On October 23, 2009, the University of Delaware signed an agreement with
Chrysler to purchase a shuttered vehicle assembly plant adjacent to the
university for $24.25 million as part of Chrysler's bankruptcy restructuring
plan.[19] The university has developed the 272-acre (1.10 km2) site into the
Science, Technology and Advanced Research (STAR) Campus. The site is the new
home of UD's College of Health Sciences, which includes teaching and research
laboratories and several public health clinics. The STAR Campus also includes
research facilities for UD's vehicle-to-grid technology, as well as Delaware
Technology Park, SevOne, CareNow, Independent Prosthetics and Orthotics, and
the East Coast headquarters of Bloom Energy.[20] In 2020, UD expects to open
the Ammon Pinozzotto Biopharmaceutical Innovation Center, which will become
the new home of the UD-led National Institute for Innovation in Manufacturing
Biopharmaceuticals. Also, Chemours is expected to open its global research and
development facility, known as the Discovery Hub, on the STAR Campus in 2020.
The new Newark Regional Transportation Center on the STAR Campus will serve
passengers of Amtrak and regional rail.  

USNWR graduate school rankings[30]

USNWR departmental rankings[30]

The university is organized into eight colleges:

There are also four schools:

_U.S. News& World Report_ ranked UD's undergraduate program tied for 89th
among "national universities" and tied for 38th among public universities in
2019.[32]

_Times Higher Education World University Rankings_ ranked UD 145th nationally
and between 251st and 300th internationally in 2019.[33]

The Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics offers bachelor's,
master’s and doctoral degree programs across five departments: accounting and
MIS, business administration, economics, finance and hospitality business
management.

As the second largest of UD’s eight colleges, Lerner includes a diverse
community of 3,332 undergraduate students, 869 graduate students, 209 faculty
and staff, and more than 34,000 alumni across the globe. Lerner is the only
Delaware business school with a dual AACSB-accreditation in business (1966)
and accounting (1984).

Lerner maintains its own Career Services center and undergraduate advising
department and houses two research centers, the Center for Economic Education
and Entrepreneurship (CEEE) and the Institute for Financial Services Analytics
(IFSA). Its experiential learning facilities include the Geltzeiler Trading
Center, Vita Nova restaurant, and the Courtyard Newark at the University of
Delaware, owned by UD and managed by Shaner Hotels.

The college became the Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics in
2002. It was named after MBNA chairman and CEO Alfred Lerner, who was one of
America’s successful business leaders and philanthropists, especially in his
support of educational causes.

In Fall 2014, University of Delaware created a Ph.D. in Financial Services
Analytics (FSAN). The Ph.D. in FSAN is a cross-disciplinary program offered by
the Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics and the College of
Engineering at the University of Delaware, and was funded in part by a grant
from JPMorgan Chase. The program is the first of its kind.

The School of Business and Economics was created in 1963, and was formally
founded as of the College of Business and Economics in 1965.

The first MBA program at UD began in 1952. In 1917 the University of Delaware
established the first undergraduate business major in business administration.

The College of Agriculture and Natural Resources offers bachelor’s, master’s
and doctoral degree programs across four departments: animal and food
sciences, entomology and wildlife ecology, plant and soil sciences, and
applied economics and statistics. As of fall 2018, the College of Agriculture
and Natural Resources had 81 faculty, 851 undergraduate students and 205
graduate students. According to a United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) employment report, there are two jobs available for every graduate of
agriculture and related sciences. More than 98% of the College’s recent
graduates secured jobs in their field of study.

One of the few colleges in the country with a working farm on campus, the
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources includes a 350-acre outdoor
classroom in Newark that encompasses farmland, forests, grasslands, wetlands
and a working dairy. State-of-the-art research laboratories, greenhouses, and
food-processing facilities offer unique hands-on opportunities, and students
gain experience operating the UDairy Creamery and UD Fresh to You, an organic
farm and retail stand.

In Georgetown, Del., the College of Agriculture and Natural Resources is home
to the Carvel Research and Education Center, which includes more than 300
acres of farmland for agronomy research and varietal trials. The Lasher
Laboratory, also on the Georgetown campus, is the primary poultry diagnostic
laboratory in the state of Delaware, providing rapid and comprehensive
diagnostic services to commercial poultry producers and owners of small non-
commercial flocks.

University of Delaware’s Cooperative Extension, the outreach arm of the
College of Agriculture and Natural Resources established by the Smith-Lever
Act in 1914, completes the tripartite mission of land-grant institutions to
offer teaching, research and service. Cooperative Extension takes the
innovative work developed at the College and shares it with the public,
putting knowledge into practice in pursuit of economic vitality, ecological
sustainability and social wellbeing.

Through the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of Delaware
students can choose from an array of concentrations. They can choose from
programs in visual and performing arts, social sciences, natural sciences and
many more.[34] The College of Arts and Sciences has 23 academic departments.
It is the largest of UD's colleges, with about 6,400 undergraduate students,
1,200 graduate students and more than 600 faculty members.[35]

The Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences is John A. Pelesko, who has been
a UD faculty member in the Department of Mathematical Sciences since 2002.
Pelesko previously served as associate dean for the natural sciences of the
College of Arts and Sciences from 2016-18.

The College of Earth, Ocean and Environment (CEOE) is made up of the
Department of Geography and Spatial Sciences, the Department of Earth
Sciences, and the School of Marine Science and Policy. There are four programs
in the School of Marine Science and Policy: Marine Biosciences, Oceanography,
Physical Ocean Science and Engineering, and Marine Policy. The college offers
over nine undergraduate majors, and 17 graduate degrees and two professional
certificates.

Undergraduate science majors at UD have the opportunity to apply for the
CEOE's Semester-in-Residence Program, in which students live and work at the
Lewes campus which is located on the Delaware Bay. The Lewes campus has many
advanced marine research facilities, including the Global Visualization Lab
and the Robotic Discovery Laboratories, both of which focus on the use of
autonomous research vehicles for collecting data underwater, from the surface
and in the air. Lewes is also home to UD's marine operations, which feature
the R/V Joanne Daiber for research in the Delaware Bay and the R/V Hugh R.
Sharp, a 146-foot, state-of-the-art coastal research vessel that operates as a
member of the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS).
Students work on a research project guided by a faculty member in addition to
taking "introductory graduate-level classes." Additionally, any student in the
United States who is enrolled in a bachelor's degree program may apply for the
college's Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program.

In 2019, CEOE opened the Offshore Wind Skills Academy, the first US skills
training program for offshore wind energy professionals. The Academy combines
expertise from CEOE faculty in U.S. policy around wind energy with instruction
from European faculty on the technical and practical aspects of developing
offshore wind energy, an industry that is further developed in their waters.

The college also offers may undergraduate study abroad opportunities to places
such as New Zealand, Mexico, Bonaire, Fiji, Barbados, Austria, and London. A
geology fieldwork course held in various locations throughout the American
West is also available and required for geological sciences majors.

The College of Education and Human Development (CEHD) programs integrate
classwork with extensive field experience, preparing students to address
complex social and educational issues. More than 100 faculty members guide
about 1,400 undergraduate and graduate students to become educators,
researchers, advocates and leaders in community organizations, government and
non-profit agencies. CEHD’s graduate education program is consistently ranked
among the top 50 by US News & World Report.

CEHD consists of two academic departments (the School of Education and the
Department of Human Development and Family Sciences) and nine centers whose
interdependent triad of education, research and service provides faculty,
staff, students and alumni a uniting purpose: develop strategies,
interventions and initiatives that will aid individuals, groups and
communities around the world to achieve their maximum potential.

The School of Education is a nationally recognized and accredited program
dedicated to developing education professionals. Students can earn an A.A. or
B.S. in elementary teacher education or an M.A., M.Ed., Ed.D., or Ph.D. degree
in range of specializations. The Department of Human Development and Family
Sciences offers three undergraduate majors in early childhood education, human
relations administration and human services. Students can also earn a master’s
degree through several 4+1 programs, or receive an M.A. in Early Childhood
Development & Programming or an M.S. or Ph.D. in Human Development and Family
Sciences.

Faculty engage in solution-driven research that covers the full spectrum of
life-stages: early child development, school instruction, adolescent behavior,
family/parent intervention, professional development for educators,
diversity/equity/inclusion, wellness, school leadership, public policy and
senior care.

CEHD’s research, service and education centers — including the Children’s
Campus which houses three education sites serving children from birth to
eighth grade — provide living laboratories for researchers, undergraduate and
graduate students to serve the greater community, by investigating,
implementing and modeling evidenced-based practices.

The _U.S. News & World Report_ ranked the University of Delaware's engineering
graduate program as #47[36] and the undergraduate program as #55 in 2018.[37]
_U.S. News & World Report_ ranked both the undergraduate and graduate chemical
engineering programs as #9 in the country in 2018.

The College of Engineering is home to seven academic departments offering
bachelor's degree, master's degree and doctoral degree programs focused on
challenges associated biopharmaceuticals, cybersecurity, data science, energy,
the environment, human health, infrastructure, manufacturing, materials and
nanofabrication. Undergraduate degrees are offered in biomedical engineering,
chemical engineering, civil engineering, computer engineering, computer
science, construction engineering and management, electrical engineering,
environmental engineering, information systems, materials science and
engineering, and mechanical engineering. As of fall 2018, the College of
Engineering had 180 full-time faculty, 2,425 undergraduate students and 932
graduate students.

The faculty includes 31 named professors, eight career development named
professors, eight National Academy of Engineers members, 44 NSF career award
winners and 17 University teaching award recipients. Initiatives led by
college faculty include 15 college-based research centers and 14 university-
based research institutes. Strategic partnerships with industry, government
and academic institutions complement these initiatives, expanding the
college's reputation and reach and cultivating a culture of interdisciplinary
collaboration, leadership and entrepreneurship among future engineers.

The College of Engineering has a presence in approximately 20 different
buildings on and off campus. This includes modern classrooms and research
laboratories such as the Advanced Materials Characterization Lab and
Nanofabrication Facility located in the Interdisciplinary Science and
Engineering Laboratory. Student maker-spaces also give undergraduates
opportunities for hands-on learning.

The College of Health Sciences (CHS) is home to seven academic departments,
including newly created Epidemiology. The College of Health Sciences offers
bachelor’s degree, master’s degree and doctoral degree programs that take
evidence-based research and translate it into person-centered care.
Undergraduate degrees are offered in applied molecular biology and
biotechnology, exercise science, health behavioral science, medical
diagnostics, medical laboratory science, nursing, nutrition, nutrition and
dietetics, nutrition and medical sciences, and sports health. Pre-physician's
assistant and occupational therapy tracks are also available. As of fall 2018,
the College of Health Sciences included 148 faculty, 2,556 undergraduate
students and 509 graduate students. The College includes the state of
Delaware's only education program for speech pathologists, a state-of-the-art
Health Design Innovation space to bring research to life and change the
quality-of-life for the surrounding community.

_U.S. News& World Report_ ranked the University of Delaware’s physical therapy
program as #1 in 2016. The College of Health Sciences was ranked #2 in
National Institute of Health funding among Schools of Allied Health
Professions in 2018.

The College is headquartered at the university's Science, Technology and
Advanced Research (STAR) Campus. Located on the site of a former Chrysler
automotive assembly plant, College of Health Sciences buildings include the
Health Sciences Complex (opened in December 2013) and the Tower at STAR
(opened in August 2018). The Health Sciences Complex includes Translation
Hallway; where research labs translate into clinical care across the hallway.
The Tower at STAR includes a Demonstration Kitchen, Living Wall, Exercise
Intervention Space for chronic disease, Health Design Innovation lab,
Interprofessional Simulation space and a Simulation Apartment where prevention
and wellness are the focus for the future of health care delivery. Plans for
the STAR Campus include expanding university-based research and shared
research in collaboration with the National Institute for Innovation in
Manufacturing Biopharmaceuticals (NIIMBL) and the chemical company Chemours.

The College is also home to UD Health which includes three public clinics
focusing on physical therapy, nurse managed primary care, and speech-language-
hearing. Additional services include health coaching, nutrition counseling,
and exercise testing/counseling. Recruitment is ongoing for many research
studies as well.

On July 1, 2019, the University of Delaware transitioned the former Office of
Graduate and Professional Education to the institution’s eighth college.

The first doctoral programs at UD — in chemical engineering and chemistry —
were approved in 1946. The University awarded its first doctorate — in
chemical engineering — in 1948. Currently, more than 3,600 graduate students
are enrolled at UD. The University offers more than 200 graduate and
professional degree programs — many ranked by the National Research Council at
the top of their fields.[38]

While the majority of graduate degrees are housed within the other seven
colleges, the Graduate College serves as a coordinating body, providing
administrative oversight for graduate student recruitment, student-life
services, professional development programming, interdisciplinary programs,
and marketing and market research.

The Institute of Energy Conversion (IEC) at the University of Delaware is the
oldest solar energy research institute in the world. It was established by
Karl Boer in 1972 to pioneer research on thin film solar cells and today is
one of the only laboratories in the world with expertise in Si, CdTe, and
CuInSe2 based solar cells. This included the development of one of the first
solar powered homes, a structure still utilized by the university's student-
run ambulance service, the University of Delaware Emergency Care Unit.[39]
Recently the IEC was the number one recipient of the DOE Sunshot Initiative
and was awarded 5 grants totaling $9.1 million to research next generation
solar cells to reduce the cost of solar cells by 75% by the end of the
decade.[40]

The Disaster Research Center, or DRC, was the first social science research
center in the world devoted to the study of disasters. It was established at
Ohio State University in 1963 and moved to the University of Delaware in 1985.
The Center conducts field and survey research on group, organizational and
community preparation for, response to, and recovery from natural and
technological disasters and other community-wide crises. DRC researchers have
carried out systematic studies on a broad range of disaster types, including
hurricanes, floods, earthquakes, tornadoes, hazardous chemical incidents, and
plane crashes. DRC has also done research on civil disturbances and riots,
including the 1992 Los Angeles unrest. Staff have conducted nearly 700 field
studies since the Center's inception, traveling to communities throughout the
United States and internationally, including Mexico, Canada, Japan, Italy, and
Turkey. Core faculty members are from the Department of Sociology and Criminal
Justice, the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and the School
of Public Policy and Administration. The staff also includes postdoctoral
fellows, graduate students, undergraduates and research support personnel.

The Delaware Biotechnology Institute, or DBI, was organized as an academic
unit of the University of Delaware in 1999 and moved into dedicated research
facilities in 2001. DBI supports a statewide partnership of higher education,
industry, medical, and government communities committed to the discovery and
application of interdiscplinary knowledge in biotechnology and the life
sciences. With some 180 people resident in the DBI facilities, including 20–25
faculty members representing 12 departments, 140 graduate and post-graduate
students, and 20 professional staff members, DBI emphasizes a multi-
disciplinary approach to life-science research. The core research areas
pursued by DBI-affiliated faculty include agriculture, human health, marine
environmental genomics, biomaterials, and computational
biology/bioinformatics. Research in these and other areas is done in
collaboration with faculty at Delaware State University, Delaware Technical
and Community College, Wesley College, Christiana Care Health System, and
Nemours Hospital for Children. One of the primary objectives of the Institute
is to provide state-of-the-art research equipment to facilitate life science
research and six core instrumentation centers and specialized facilities, each
under the direction of an experienced researcher or administrator, is
supported at DBI and made available to university researchers.

The Delaware Environmental Institute (DENIN) launched on October 23, 2009.
DENIN is charged with conducting research and promoting and coordinating
knowledge partnerships that integrate environmental science, engineering and
policy.[41]

The University of Delaware Energy Institute (UDEI) was inaugurated September
19, 2008. UDEI has been selected to receive a $3 million a year grant for
advanced solar research.[42]

The John L. Weinberg Center for Corporate Governance was established in 2000
at the Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics. Its aim is to propose
changes in corporate structure and management through education and
interaction. The Center provides a forum for those interested in corporate
governance issues.[43]

In February 2017, the School of Public Policy and Administration announced the
creation of the Joseph R. Biden, Jr. Institute (Biden Institute), named after
alumnus Joe Biden, the 47th Vice President of the United States.[44]

The student body at the University of Delaware is primarily an undergraduate
population. The university offers more than 150 undergraduate degree programs
and, due to the number of academic options, many students complete dual
degrees as well as double majors and minors. UD students have access to work
and internship opportunities, worldwide study abroad programs, research and
service learning programs.

The campus itself is divided into four areas:[46]

In 1891, prominent Philadelphia architect Frank Furness designed Recitation
Hall.[47] Several buildings (Wolf, Sussex, and Harter Halls) were designed by
Frank Miles Day who also designed the formal campus landscape. From 1918 to
1952, Marian Cruger Coffin was appointed the university's landscape architect,
a position which required her to unite the university's two separate campuses
(the men's to the north and the women's to the south) into one cohesive
design.[48] This was a challenge since the linear mall design of each was out
of alignment with the other. Coffin solved this problem by linking them with a
circle (now called Magnolia Circle) instead of curving the straight paths,
which rendered the misalignment unnoticeable to the pedestrian.[49]

North, or Laird, Campus, formerly home to the Pencader Complex, has been
entirely redesigned and renamed Independence Complex. This began with the
construction of a Marriott Courtyard run by the HRIM (Hotel Restaurant and
Institutional Management) department. Four residence hall buildings have been
built, three named after the three University alumni who signed the
Declaration of Independence (George Read, Thomas McKean, and James Smith, who
signed for Pennsylvania); the fourth residence hall was named Independence
Hall.[50]

Other major facilities that have opened since 2000 include:

In 2015, the UD Board of Trustees elected Dennis Assanis as the 28th President
of the University of Delaware; he took office in June 2016. He succeeded Nancy
Targett, former Dean of the University's College of Earth, Ocean and
Environment, who served as interim president in 2015-16. She was named 27th
president of the university near the end of her service; she was the
institution's first female president. Target served after the departure of
President Patrick Harker in 2015 to serve as the President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.[52]

The university receives funding from a variety of sources as a consequence of
its historical origins. Among those sources is the State of Delaware budget.
In fiscal year 2018, the state operating appropriation was 12% of the
university's operating revenue.[53] Tuition and fees (net of scholarships and
fellowships) make up 43% of the university's operating budget.

The Delaware First fundraising and engagement campaign is the largest
philanthropic campaign in UD history. Launched in November 2017, the campaign
goal is to raise $750 million by summer 2020. As of spring 2019, the campaign
had raised about $700 million.

The University of Delaware was the first American university to begin a study-
abroad program, which was later adopted by many other institutions.[54] The
program began when Professor Raymond Watson Kirkbride took a group of nine
students to Paris, France, during the fall semester of 1923. Since this
initial trip, the University of Delaware has expanded its study-abroad
program, which now encompasses more than 40 countries. About one-third of UD
undergraduate students take advantage of study-abroad experiences prior to
completing their bachelor's degrees.

Delaware's study-abroad program offers many options for students.
Undergraduates have the option of studying abroad for a five-week winter or
summer session, or an entire semester.[55]

The athletic teams at Delaware are known as the Fightin' Blue Hens with a
mascot named YoUDee. YoUDee is a Blue Hen Chicken, after the team names and
the state bird of Delaware. YoUDee was elected into the mascot hall of fame in
2006, and is an eight-time UCA Open Division Mascot National Champion.[56]

UD offers 21 varsity sports, which compete in the NCAA Division-I (FCS for
football). Delaware is a member of the Colonial Athletic Association (CAA) in
all sports. Delaware was a member of the Atlantic 10 Conference in football
until the 2006 season. The Fightin' Blue Hens football teams have won six
national titles, including the 2003 NCAA I-AA Championship. In 2007, the
Delaware Blue Hens were the runners up in the NCAA I-AA National Championship
game, but were defeated by (defending champions) Appalachian State. In 2010,
the Delaware Blue Hens were again runners up in the National Championship
game, losing to Eastern Washington 20–19 after being up 19–0 earlier in the
game.

Former head football coaches Bill Murray, Dave Nelson and Harold "Tubby"
Raymond are College Football Hall of Fame inductees. Delaware is one of only
two schools to have three straight head coaches inducted into the College
Football Hall of Fame (Georgia Tech is the other).[57] Delaware's only other
NCAA National Championships came in 1983 for Women's Division I Lacrosse[58]
and on November 20, 2016, when the Delaware women's field hockey team won the
school's first NCAA Division I national championship, defeating North
Carolina, 3-2.

The Blue Hens have won twenty-two CAA Championships since joining in 2001: one
for the 2015 women's golf team, the women's 2004-2009-2013-2014-2015-2016
field hockey teams, the 2007-2010-2011 men's lacrosse teams, the 2014 men's
basketball team, the 2005-2012-2013 women's basketball teams, the
2007-2008-2010-2011 women's volleyball teams, the 2012–2016 men's soccer
teams, the 2014 women's track and field team, and the 2010 football team
(shared with William & Mary). (Unofficially, the women's rowing team has won
the CAA title four times since 2001, placing second the other two times.) The
2007 men's lacrosse program reached the final four of the NCAA Tournament for
the first time in its history.

On March 7, 2012, the Division 1 men's ice hockey team won the ACHA National
Championship. UD defeated Oakland University 5–1, capturing its first title.

"The Delaware Fight Song" first appeared in the Student Handbook in 1933.[59]
It was composed by alumnus George F. Kelly (Class of 1915).

In November 2007, it was announced that the University of Delaware and
Delaware State University would have their first game against each other, the
game being in the first round of the NCAA Division I Football Championship
Subdivision playoffs. The game was played on November 23, with University of
Delaware winning 44–7.[60] Delaware has won all of the regular season match-
ups, which have been called the Route 1 Rivalry. In all, the two schools
played eight games between 2007 and 2017. Games are scheduled for 2019 and
2020. In 2019, UD and DSU announced that they have scheduled six games against
each other from 2024 through 2030, including the first two games at DSU's
Alumni Stadium.[61]

The University of Delaware has a variety of musical performance opportunities
available to students, including a wind ensemble, orchestra, symphonic band.
There are also a number of jazz groups available, including two large
ensembles, and a smaller group that focus on improvisation. All ensembles are
open by audition to all students at the university, and can be taken either
for credit or for no credit. The school also has a steel drum ensemble, and an
early music ensemble. There are also a variety of choral ensembles, including
the University of Delaware Chorale, an all-women's choir, and three choirs,
also open to community members, that constitute the Schola Cantorum. The music
department's home is the Amy E. du Pont Music Building, named for Amy
Elizabeth du Pont, a prominent benefactor of the university during the 20th
century.

In addition, the University of Delaware is known for having one of the best
marching bands on the east coast, the University of Delaware Fightin' Blue Hen
Marching Band. The band ranges from 300 to 350 members every year and can be
seen performing at every home football game as well as at various festivals
and competitions, including the Collegiate Marching Band Festival in
Allentown. Additionally, the marching band was selected to perform in the 56th
Presidential Inaugural Parade in 2009.[62]

In 2006, the new Center for the Arts building opened. This building has a
number of recital halls and a large number of practice rooms, most with
upright pianos. The practice rooms are locked and cannot be used by students
who are not music majors or in an official UD ensemble. The university employs
a tiered access system, with larger rooms and rooms with grand pianos being
reserved for certain groups of students. In addition the music department also
uses their old building, with offices, classrooms, practice rooms, and recital
halls. This building has public-access practice rooms with pianos.

In 2005, the University of Delaware Chorale, under the direction of Paul D.
Head and accompanied by Betsy Kent, were invited to perform at the American
Choral Directors Association's International Convention in Los Angeles. In
April 2007, the Chorale won the Grand Prix at the Tallinn International Choral
Festival in Estonia, having scored higher than 40 other choirs from around the
world. In 2010 the Chorale competed in two categories of the 42nd Annual
Tolosa Choral Competition in Tolosa, Spain; They received a Bronze and a
Silver award. UD-16, a chamber ensemble of Chorale also competed in Tolosa in
two categories and won two Silver awards. In the Summer of 2012 the Chorale
was the only American College Choir to be invited to the International Society
for Music Education Conference in Thessaloniki, Greece; the UD Steele Ensemble
was also invited. On that same tour, the chorale placed in a close 2nd at the
Grand Prix of the 25th Bela Bartok International Choral Competition. In 2000,
the music department purchased an 18th-century Ceruti violin for professor and
violinist Xiang Gao.

The university also has a student run radio station, 91.3 WVUD, as well as
several a cappella groups including one all-female, one all-male, and five
mixed groups.

For the 2019-20 academic year, undergraduate tuition and fees is $14,280 for
Delaware residents and $35,710 for non-residents. Total cost of attendance for
the 2019–20 academic year (tuition, mandatory fees, room and board) is $27,488
for Delawareans and $48,918 for non-residents.[63]

There are currently two student publications at Delaware: _The Review_ and
_UDress_ , as well as radio and television stations.

_The Review_ is a weekly student publication, released in print and online on
Tuesdays. It is an independent publication and receives no financial support
from the university. It is distributed at several locations across campus,
including Morris Library, the Perkins Student Center and the Trabant
University Center, as well as various academic buildings and the dining halls.
_The Review'_ s office is located at 250 Perkins Student Center, facing
Academy Street, and is above the offices of WVUD. In 2004, it was a National
Newspaper Pacemaker Award Finalist, and was also named one of the ten best
non-daily college newspapers by the Associated Collegiate Press.[64] It
currently has a print circulation of 10,000.

_UDress_ magazine is the on-campus fashion magazine which publishes one issue
per semester, in conjunction with fashion events.

The student-run, non-commercial, educational radio station at Delaware
broadcasts on 91.3 and uses the call letters WVUD, which the university
purchased from the University of Dayton in the 1980s. Although not its
intended call letter pronunciation, 'VUD has taken on the slogan "the Voice of
the University of Delaware." They are licensed by the city of Newark, Delaware
and broadcasts with a power of 1,000 watts 24 hours a day with its offices and
studios located in the Perkins Student Center.[65]

The transmitting facilities are located atop the Christiana East Tower
residence hall. WVUD is operated by University of Delaware students, a
University staff of two, and community members. No prior radio experience is
necessary, nor is there a need to enroll in any certain major to become a part
of WVUD. The radio station has a variety of programming, featuring both music
and talk formats.

STN is the student-run, non-commercial, educational television station at the
University of Delaware. The station broadcasts second-run movies, original
student produced content as well as live sports coverage. The initials, STN,
originally stood for Shane Thomas Network, later changed to Student Television
Network.[66]

Approximately 25% of the University of Delaware's undergraduate student
population is affiliated with a fraternity or sorority.[67] There are over 26
fraternities and 20 sororities (chapters & colonies) in the Interfraternity
Council (IFC), National Panhellenic Conference (NPC), and Multicultural Greek
Congress (MGC). They all coordinate via the Greek Council. All Greek
organizations participate in an accreditation process called the Chapter
Assessment Program (CAP).[68] CAP ratings award chapters with either a Gold,
Silver, Bronze, Satisfactory or Needs Improvement designation. This system is
an expansion from the Five Star program of the late 1990s, requiring
contributions to community service, philanthropy, university events, diversity
education, professional education, a chapter/colony GPA greater than or equal
to the all men's or all women's average, and attendance and compliance with
numerous other criteria.

Active fraternities include Alpha Phi Alpha, Kappa Alpha Psi, Phi Beta Sigma,
Lambda Sigma Upsilon, Pi Alpha Phi, Phi Kappa Psi, Delta Tau Delta, Delta
Sigma Pi, Alpha Sigma Phi, Kappa Delta Rho, Kappa Sigma, Sigma Alpha Epsilon,
Alpha Gamma Rho, Lambda Chi Alpha, Sigma Pi, Sigma Phi Delta, Theta Chi, Kappa
Alpha Order, Pi Kappa Phi, Zeta Beta Tau, Sigma Nu, Phi Gamma Delta, and Sigma
Phi Epsilon.

Active sororities include Delta Sigma Theta, Alpha Kappa Alpha, Zeta Phi Beta,
Lambda Theta Alpha, Chi Upsilon Sigma, Lambda Pi Chi, Delta Phi Lambda, Phi
Sigma Sigma, Alpha Delta Pi, Alpha Xi Delta, Gamma Phi Beta, Alpha Epsilon
Phi, Chi Omega, Sigma Kappa, Alpha Phi, Delta Gamma, Alpha Sigma Alpha, Pi
Beta Phi, Delta Delta Delta, and Kappa Alpha Theta.

A campus website claims that a 1993 study by the Harvard School of Public
Health found that high-risk drinking at UD exceeded the national norm. On this
survey, a majority of students reported binge drinking more than once in a
two-week interval. The average consumption for students was nine drinks per
week, while 29% reported that they drink on 10 or more occasions per month. UD
students were found to be more aware of policies, prevention programs, and
enforcement risks than the national average.[69]

In 2005, on the Newark campus of the university 1140 students were picked up
by the campus police for alcohol-related violations. Of these, 120 led to
arrests. These figures are up from previous years, 1062 in 2004 and 1026 in
2003.[70] This represents approximately 6% of the student population.[71]

At least one student organization has undertaken the goal of "providing fun
activities for those who chose not to drink" and to "promote the idea that one
doesn't need alcohol to have a good time."[72]

In 2008, a University of Delaware freshman died of alcohol poisoning after
attending a party hosted by members of the Sigma Alpha Mu fraternity, where
the student was pledging.[73]

Although the university has attempted to make efforts in preventing alcohol
abuse, a student visiting from another college died on March 19, 2016 in an
alcohol-related incident.[74] The student was standing alone on the roof of an
off-campus fraternity, and slipped off it.

The University of Delaware operates multiple shuttle routes called "UD
Shuttle" that serve the campus. The North/South Academy route runs the north-
south length of the campus via Academy Street and offers daily service, with
late night service Friday and Saturday. The North/South College route runs the
north-south length of the campus via College Avenue and offers service on
weekdays. The East Loop route runs a loop through the eastern part of the
campus and Newark and offers daily service, with late night service Friday and
Saturday. The West Loop route runs a loop through the western part of the
campus and Newark and offers daily service, with late night service Friday and
Saturday. The Early Bird route offers early morning weekday service serving
the north-south length of the campus while the Late Bird route offers late
night service daily serving the north-south length of the campus.[75]

The University of Delaware Emergency Care Unit (UDECU) is a registered student
organization at the university, which provides emergency medical services to
the campus and surrounding community. UDECU has approximately 50 members, all
of which are volunteers and students at the University of Delaware. UDECU
operates one basic life support ambulance (UD-1), one first response vehicle
(UD-2), and a bike team.[76][77] Advanced life support is provided by New
Castle County Emergency Medical Services.

The university agreed to lease 43 acres on the STAR campus to The Data Centers
(TDC) for the construction of the data center. The data center plan included a
combined heat cycle natural gas-fired power plant capable of generating 279
megawatts of energy.[78] TDC claimed that the power plant was critical to
ensuring an uninterrupted electrical power supply to the facility, which is
critical for data integrity. The TDC business plan also called for sale of
excess electricity. Portions of the Newark community questioned the business
plan, claiming that the power plant is not an auxiliary part of the data
center but a separate industrial use, which would violate the zoning of the
STAR campus.[79]

On April 28, 2014, the City of Newark Board of Adjustment upheld its April 19,
2014 ruling that the power plant is an accessory to the data center and that
no rezoning was required.[80] The ruling is presently under appeal. The
University of Delaware's Sustainability Task Force sent an open letter to
President Harker citing concerns that the project violates the university's
strategic plan and Climate Action Plan.[81] On May 4, 2014, the University
Faculty Senate voted 43 to 0 (with 8 abstentions) to recommend to the
administration that it not allow construction of The Data Center on UD's STAR
campus if The Data Center includes any fossil-fuel-burning power
plant.[82][83] On July 10, 2014 the university announced that it was
terminating the lease for the project.[84]

In the fall of 2007, the university implemented a new residence-life education
program that was criticized for forcing students into polarizing discussions.
The program was abandoned in November.[85]

Notable alumni of the University of Delaware include the 47th Vice President
of the United States and former U.S. Senator Joe Biden (B.A. 1965); former
Second Lady of the United States Jill Biden (B.A. 1976); former New Jersey
Governor Chris Christie (B.A. 1984); campaign manager David Plouffe (B.A.
2010); Nobel Prize-winning microbiologist Daniel Nathans (B.S. 1950) and
organic chemist Richard F. Heck; Henry C Brinton (BS Physics, 1957) Director
of Research Division at NASA; Rwandan Minister of Foreign Affairs and
Cooperation, Louise Mushikiwabo (M.A. 1988);[86] the former president of Emory
University James W. Wagner (B.A. 1975)[ _citation needed_ ];Chicago Bears Head
Coach Matt Nagy; and Super Bowl XLVII's MVP Joe Flacco.

Joe Biden, former Vice-President of the United States

Jill Biden, former Second Lady of the United States

Chris Christie, former Governor of New Jersey

Elena Delle Donne, WNBA star

Joe Flacco, NFL Quarterback

Caesar Rodney, signer of the Declaration of Independence

Coordinates: 39°40′42″N 75°45′4″W﻿ / ﻿39.67833°N 75.75111°W﻿ / 39.67833;
-75.75111

