The **University of Memphis** , colloquially known as **U of M** , is a public
research university in Memphis, Tennessee. Founded in 1912, the university has
an enrollment of more than 21,000 students.

The university maintains The Center for Earthquake Research and Information
(CERI), The Cecil C. Humphreys School of Law, the former Lambuth University
campus (now a branch campus of The University of Memphis), The Loewenberg
College of Nursing, The School of Public Health, The College of Communication
and Fine Arts, The FedEx Institute of Technology, The Advanced Distributed
Learning Workforce Co-Lab, and The Institute of Egyptian Art and Archaeology.

The University of Memphis is associated with the Tennessee Board of Regents
(TBR) system, consisting of 18 Board Members. However, as of May 2017, it is
governed by an institutional Board of Trustees. Within this framework, the
President of the University of Memphis is the day-to-day administrator of the
university.

The University of Memphis today comprises a number of different colleges and
schools:

The University of Memphis is host to several centers of advanced research:

The University of Memphis Foundation, founded in 1964, manages the university
endowment and accepts, manages and disburses private support to the
university.[13]

In 1909, the Tennessee Legislature enacted the General Education Bill. This
bill stated that three colleges be established, one within each grand division
of the state and one additional school for African-American students. After
much bidding and campaigning, the state had to choose between two sites to
build the new college for West Tennessee: Jackson and Memphis. Memphis was
chosen, one of the main reasons being the proximity of the rail line to the
site proposed to build the new college for West Tennessee. This would allow
professors and students to go home and visit their relatives. The other three
schools established through the General Education Act evolved into East
Tennessee State University (ETSU), Middle Tennessee State University (MTSU),
and Tennessee State University (TSU).

Prior to the establishment of the **West Tennessee Normal School** [
_clarification needed_ ] pursuant to the General Education Bill, a number of
higher education departments existed in Memphis under the banner of the
_University of Memphis._ This earlier University of Memphis was formed in 1909
by adding to an already existing medical school's departments of pharmacy,
dentistry, and law.[14]

On September 10, 1912, West Tennessee Normal School opened in Memphis; its
first president was Seymour A. Mynders. By 1913 all departments of the earlier
_University of Memphis,_ except the law school, had been taken over by West
Tennessee Normal School.[14][15] After Mynders' death in 1913, John Willard
Brister was chosen to take his place. After Brister's resignation in 1918,
Andrew A. Kincannon became president. In 1924, Brister returned to his post as
president of the school.

The name changed in 1925 to **West Tennessee State Teachers College**. In
1931, the campus' first newspaper, _The Tiger Rag_ , was established. In 1939,
Richard C. Jones became president of WTSTC. In 1941, the name was changed to
**Memphis State College** , when the college expanded its liberal arts
curriculum. In 1943, Dr. Jennings B. Sanders succeeded Jones as president.
Three years later, the first alumnus to become president, J. Millard (Jack)
Smith, was appointed. In 1951 MSC awarded its first B.A. degrees. In 1957 the
school received full University status and changed its name accordingly to
**Memphis State University**.

In 1959, five years after Brown v. Board of Education the university admitted
its first black students. Racial segregation was the norm throughout the South
at the time. The Memphis State Eight, as they were known, were admitted to
Memphis State University. Their presence on campus was the focus not only of
intense media scrutiny, but severe criticism from much of the local public.
Ostensibly for the black students' safety and to maintain an air of calm on
the campus, University administrators placed certain restrictions on where and
when the black students could be on campus. They were to go only to their
classes, not to any of the public places on campus, such as the cafeteria; and
they were to leave the campus immediately after they had finished their last
class. These limitations were lifted after the novelty of their presence on
campus had subsided and the public's focus on their presence there had
lessened, and as more and more black students were admitted to the university.
Today, black students make up more than one-third of the campus student body
and participate in all campus activities.

Cecil C. Humphreys became president of MSU, succeeding Smith, in 1960. In
1966, the school began awarding doctoral degrees. Humphreys resigned as MSU
president to become the first chancellor of the newly formed State University
and Community College System, later renamed the Tennessee Board of Regents.
John Richardson was appointed interim president.

In 1973, Dr. Billy Mac Jones became president. Also that year, the Memphis
State Tiger men's basketball team reached the finals of the NCAA tournament,
only to fall at the hands of a UCLA team led by future NBA superstar and Hall
of Famer Bill Walton in The NCAA Basketball Championship Game in St. Louis,
Missouri. In 1980, Thomas Carpenter became president of MSU; he was succeeded
by V. Lane Rawlins in 1991. On July 1, 1994, Memphis State University changed
its name again, to the **University of Memphis**.

V. Lane Rawlins served from 1991 to 2000; Dr. Ralph Faudree filled in as
interim president for one year after V. Lane Rawlins' departure. In 2001, The
U of M installed its first female president, Shirley Raines, who retired in
the summer of 2013. After a yearlong search, Dr. M. David Rudd was confirmed
as the 12th president on May 1, 2014.[16]

The University of Memphis campus is located approximately 5 miles (8.0 km)
east of downtown in the University District neighborhood of east Memphis. It
has an area of 1,160 acres (4.7 km2), although this figure does not include
the law school in the former United States federal customshouse in downtown
Memphis, which opened in January 2010. The historical core of campus
encompasses approximately 30 acres (120,000 m2).

Campus planners have significantly increased the amount of green space and the
number of walkways over the past several years, while maintaining the original
historic architecture of the campus.

Surrounding the university's main campus are several historic neighborhoods to
the north and east, as well as the University District neighborhood and the
commercial Highland Strip to the west. Many University of Memphis college
students also reside in housing south of the main campus.

The University of Memphis campus is set out in a rectilinear format, planned
as a geometric design similar to the Jeffersonian style of the University of
Virginia.

Despite gradual expansion of the campus to the West and South, the campus is
fairly compact and retains a park-like, tree-lined setting. The farthest
distance on campus takes about twenty-five minutes to walk. According to the
most recent master plan, the University of Memphis is projected to expand and
redevelop additional areas one block west of the main campus' current western
boundary of Patterson St., making Highland Avenue the "de facto" entrance to
the university.[17]

The center of the main campus comprises buildings that made up the original
campus. The first college buildings, including Scates Hall, Manning Hall, and
The Administration Building, were erected in the early 20th century. This
section stretches from Deloach Ave. south to the end of the main campus at
Walker Ave., with most buildings surrounding The Alumni Mall and Student
Plaza. The majority of the buildings of the arts and humanities departments,
as well as those of the Physics and Astronomy departments of the College of
Arts and Science, are located in the original areas of campus.

Flanking the original area of campus to the east are the areas of major
research for The Life Sciences and Engineering departments, including J.R.
Smith Hall, The Life Sciences Building and The Herff College of Engineering
Complex, as well as The Education Department, residing in E.C. Ball Hall, and
the Art Museum of the University of Memphis, located in the Communication and
Fine Arts building. The Ned R. McWherter Library, a state-of-the art library
facility and one of the premier research libraries of the Mid-South United
States, takes up the eastern part of the campus adjacent to Dunavant Plaza and
Emeriti Grove.

The northwestern area of the main campus includes The Fogelman College of
Business and Economics, The Fogelman Executive Center (a major conference
center for regional executives visiting The University of Memphis), and The
FedEx Institute of Technology, a major research contributor in the areas of
Supply Chain Management, Nanotechnology, Robotics and Intelligent Systems.
Originally, in the north end of the campus, Norriswood Ave. was the northern
boundary and was an actual street that ran through the campus. The campus
expanded into this area in the late 1960s & early 1970s.

The western edge and southwest corner include Johnson Hall (comprising the
Geography and Geology Departments), Patterson Hall (housing the English
department), Wilder Tower, Greek Row, and the bulk of The University of
Memphis residence halls. As The University of Memphis presses ahead with its
planned expansion, many more facilities, pedestrian access, and green space
will also be created with the renovation and development of the currently
residential block east of Patterson St. in the University District
neighborhood.

On January 29, 2013, Governor Bill Haslam announced a $44.6 million state
budget pledge for the Community Health Building, which will be the new home of
The Loewenberg College of Nursing and The School of Communication Sciences and
Disorders. The University of Memphis was required to raise $15 million from
private funds to match the state funds.

In 2017, the University announced plans for a new Veterans Care Center on
campus. Located in the Psychological Services Center on campus, the Veterans
Care Center "will address the mental health needs of veterans, regardless of
era, gender, discharge status or service connection."[18]

Directly south of the main campus along the corner of Park Avenue and Getwell
Road sits the Park Avenue Campus. The Park Avenue Campus is home not only to
various intramural athletics programs and facilities, but also to various
research facilities, classrooms and the Community Health Building, which
houses the School of Communication Sciences and Disorders, the Memphis Speech
and Hearing Center, and the Loewenberg College of Nursing. The Defense
Contract Audit Agency also operates its main training facility on the Park
Avenue Campus.

Future plans include a regulation indoor soccer stadium and track facility,
capable of hosting large-scale NCAA Division I track-and-field meets.[19]

The graduate and family housing units are located at Park Avenue, 1 mile (1.6
km) from the main university campus. The complex has 150 housing units.[20]
Residents are zoned to Memphis City Schools.[21] The zoned schools are
Sherwood Elementary School,[22] Colonial Middle School,[23] and White Station
High School.[24]

In 2010, the University of Memphis, School of Law was moved permanently from
the main campus to a newly renovated downtown campus. The new University of
Memphis, School of Law campus sits adjacent to downtown courts and the
financial and administrative center of the city.

In 2011, the University of Memphis began offering undergraduate and graduate
programs on the former Lambuth University campus in Jackson, Tennessee,
located approximately 80 miles (130 km) east of Memphis. Now known as the
_University of Memphis Lambuth Campus_ , the historic campus includes
classroom buildings, dormitories, library, planetarium, and athletic
facilities. Enrollment in fall of 2011 stood at 246 students. As of the fall
of 2018, official enrollment has risen to 988 students.[25]

The Edward J. Meeman Biological Station of the University of Memphis conducts
research in ecology, environmental biology, and natural history. It is named
for Edward J. Meeman, an editor of the former _Memphis Press-Scimitar_
newspaper who later established a foundation to fund environmental
studies.[26]

In 2007, President Shirley Raines signed the American College and University
President's Climate Commitment (ACUPCC), which requires that the university
become carbon neutral.[27]

The Green Campus Initiative works to develop and implement a strategic plan to
achieve the goals of the APUPCC. Successful events and projects include the
May 2009 2nd Annual E-Recycling Day, resulting in 155 tons of electronic items
collected, and the Tiger Initiative for Gardening in Urban Settings (TIGUrS),
a fruit and vegetable gardening initiative across campus.[28]

In April 2008, the student-run Environmental Action Club ran a Green Power
Campaign to promote a student referendum to add a "Green Fee" to tuition
payments to fund clean, renewable energy and other campus sustainability
projects. The referendum passed with a 69% student approval rate. The
university is now purchasing renewable energy through the TVA's Green Power
Switch program and offsetting 10% of current energy use.[29] It is now the 2nd
largest green power purchaser in the entire TVA distribution region.[30]

In February 2009, the TERRA (Technologically and Environmentally Responsive
Residential Architecture) sustainable design demonstration house was
completed. Designed by the Department of Architecture, the LEED Platinum TERRA
house serves as a studio for which architecture and design students to design
"green" housing within urban areas, as well as serve as a demonstration house
open for tours and serving as an educational tool for the community.[31]

Memphis received a grade of "C" on the 2009 Campus Sustainability Report Card
published by the Sustainable Endowments Institute.[32] Only 34 schools earned
a higher grade.[33]

There are hundreds of student organizations on the University of Memphis
campus, including:[34]

_The Daily Helmsman_ is the student newspaper of the University of Memphis.
The editorially independent student newspaper of the university publishes
5,500 copies a day, four days a week, and employs a paid staff of more than
30, which includes an editorial team of six, more than 20 staff writers,
photographers, copy editors, and other staff members during the Fall and
Spring semesters.

The publication is part of a tradition which began in 1931 as _The Tiger Rag_
, a protest newspaper. Since that time, the newspaper has been continuously
published by University of Memphis students. Even during World War II when
paper and other resources were scarce, the newspaper published as a newsletter
posted on bulletin boards around campus.

The name of the newspaper was changed to _The Helmsman_ in 1972, and became
_The Daily Helmsman_ in 1981, when the newspaper began publishing four days a
week.

_The Helmsman_ has won many honors over the years for reporting, photography
and design, including awards given by the William Randolph Hearst Foundation,
Columbia University and the Southeastern Journalism Conference. _Helmsman_
alumni have gone on to jobs at many prestigious news organizations, such as
_The New York Times_ , _Rolling Stone magazine_ , and _Southern Living_
magazine, among others. In 2012, _The Helmsman_ and then-Editor-in-Chief
Chelsea Boozer were awarded the College Press Freedom Award for their efforts
fighting "a retaliatory budget cut while enduring a campaign of harassment by
campus police."[35] The award is given annually by the Student Press Law
Center and the Associated Collegiate Press. Boozer also won a national
Investigative Reporters and Editors award for coverage of how student activity
fees are spent, including how the Student Government Association writes its
senior officers free tuition, parking and stipends out of the money collected
from the student body.

Numerous religious centers are located on the campus, including the Wesley
Foundation (a United Methodist student center), the Baptist Student Center,
the University Catholic Center and Catholic Student Center, Ukirk (a PCUSA
campus ministry) Barth House Episcopal Student Center, Reformed University
Fellowship, the Soma Christian Student Center (a Church of Christ-supported
center), and Memphis Hillel. Numerous other religious clubs of various faiths
also exist on campus, which meet in various locations.

The University of Memphis has accumulated numerous traditions over its long
history as the flagship public research university within the Tennessee Board
of Regents system.

The Mighty Sound of the South Band is the university's band. The band performs
at Memphis Tigers football games as a marching band and at Tigers basketball
games as a pep band. As one of the oldest institutions at the university, the
Band partakes in many of the game day traditions. The MSS performs more than
any other student ensemble on campus, and for approximately 350,000 fans each
fall. The MSS is featured at nearly every campus-wide event, ranging from
Freshman Convocation to the Homecoming Parade and Pep Rally. The band has been
featured on the nationally syndicated "Mike & Mandy" Radio Show, and is a star
attraction at the Bandmaster's Championship, a high school marching band
contest administered by The University of Memphis Band Alumni Chapter. Members
of the MSS represent all academic disciplines across campus, and historically
has been open to all students via audition.

For over 30 years, the sideline mascot for The University of Memphis has been
a live Bengal tiger named TOM. During this time, the university has hosted
three successive tigers, known respectively as TOM I, TOM II, and TOM III. The
university also has a costumed tiger mascot known as Pouncer.

TOM III, the current Tiger mascot, attends all Tiger football home games and
other University events. TOM III travels in a climate-controlled trailer with
a police escort. TOM III is housed and cared for by the Highland Hundred Tiger
Guard, an alumni booster organization in a $300,000 facility. TOM II matured,
eventually weighing more than 500 pounds (230 kg). The University of Memphis
is one of only two universities in America with a live tiger mascot (the other
being LSU in Baton Rouge). After being diagnosed with mouth cancer, TOM II was
euthanized on October 15, 2008, at the age of 17. The team of veterinarians
who oversaw TOM II decided this was necessary to ensure he did not suffer due
to his illness.

The Highland Hundred football booster group found a replacement for the mascot
in the tiger cub TOM III.

The university currently has fifty tiger statues located on campus and another
fifty located around the Memphis area. The Alumni Association placed the life-
sized tigers around the city in honor of the University's Centennial in
January 2012.[36]

When the University of Memphis first fielded a football team in the fall of
1912, no one had selected a nickname for the squad. Early references to the
football team tabbed them only as the Blue and Gray Warriors.

After the final game of the 1914 season, there was a student parade. During
this event, several university students shouted, "We fight like Tigers!" The
nickname was born. As time passed, the nickname "Tigers" was increasingly
used, particularly in campus publications, but did not catch on with the
newspapers downtown. They continued to use "the Blue and Gray" when referring
to the university.

Under Coach Lester Barnard in 1922, Memphis's football team gave a ring of
truth to that old student yell about Tigers. The team adopted a motto – "Every
Man a Tiger" – and went on to score 174 points while allowing its opponents
just 29 points. The Tiger nickname continued with students and alumni,
eventually being adopted as the official nickname for the University of
Memphis in 1939.

Notable among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various events
such as commencement and convocation, and athletic games is "Go! Tigers! Go!",
the University of Memphis Tigers' fight song. The fight song was written by
Tom Ferguson, former Director of Bands at Memphis State University during the
1960s.

The Governor's School for International Studies, abbreviated GSIS, is an
academic summer program for gifted junior and senior high school students in
Tennessee. It is a selective program located at the University of Memphis in
which students study two Political Science, a foreign language, and an
elective of their choice from the International Studies curriculum. The
students, upon finishing the four-week term, gain six hours of college credit
which may be transferred to any Tennessee Board of Regents School.[37]

UofM also operates the Chucalissa Indian Village, an American Indian heritage
site and museum. Officially known as the T. O. Fuller State Park, the location
includes a museum and important archeological sites.

![](//upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/thumb/4/4a/Commons-logo.svg/12px-
Commons-logo.svg.png) Media related to University of Memphis at Wikimedia
Commons

List of colleges and universities in Tennessee

