**Valence** , as used in psychology, especially in discussing emotions, means
the intrinsic attractiveness/"good"-ness (positive valence) or
averseness/"bad"-ness (negative valence) of an event, object, or situation.[1]
The term also characterizes and categorizes specific emotions. For example,
emotions popularly referred to as "negative", such as anger and fear, have
_negative valence_. Joy has _positive valence_. Positively valenced emotions
are evoked by positively valenced events, objects, or situations. The term is
also used to describe the **hedonic tone** of feelings, affect, certain
behaviors (for example, approach and avoidance), goal attainment or
nonattainment, and conformity with or violation of norms. Ambivalence can be
viewed as conflict between positive and negative valence-carriers.[ _citation
needed_ ]

Theorists taking a valence-based approach to studying affect, judgment, and
choice posit that emotions with the same valence (e.g., anger and fear or
pride and surprise) produce a similar influence on judgments and choices.
Stress is negative valence and opposite of this is pleasure or happiness.
Stress can mean all unpleasant emotions.

The term entered English in psychology with the translation from German
("Valenz") in 1935 of works of Kurt Lewin.

Valence is one criterion used in some definitions of emotion. The possible
absence of valence is cited as a reason to exclude surprise from the list of
emotions, though some would include it.

Valence could be assigned a number and treated as if it were measured, but the
validity of a measurement based on a subjective report is questionable.
Measurement based on observations of facial expressions, using the Facial
Action Coding System and microexpressions (see Paul Ekman) or muscle activity
detected through facial electromyography, or on modern functional brain
imaging may overcome this objection. Emotional valence is represented in right
posterior superior temporal sulcus and medial prefrontal cortex.[2]

