A **value menu** (not to be confused with a value meal) is a group of menu
items at a fast food restaurant that are designed to be the least expensive
items available. In the US, the items are usually priced between $0.99 and
$1.49. The portion size, and number of items included with the food, are
typically related to the price.

Arby's announced the launch of their value menu on April 9, 2010.[1] Items on
the value menu vary based on location, but typically include small or value
size roast beef sandwiches, curly fries, milkshakes, chicken sandwiches, ham
and cheddar sandwiches, and turnovers.[2]

Burger King added a value menu in 1998 with items priced at 99¢ (USD),[3]
equivalent to $1.52 in 2018. In 2002[4] and 2006, BK revamped its value menu,
adding and removing products at 99¢, and later increasing some prices to
$1.39.[5] Many of these items have since been discontinued, modified or
relegated to a regional menu option.[6] The Burger King Whopper was the very
first 99 cent burger and it revolutionized the 99 cent menu in the fast food
industry.[7]

After numerous attempts beginning in 1991,[8] experimenting with a variety of
menus and pricing strategies,[9] McDonald's launched its first national value
menu, the _Dollar Menu_ , in late 2002 in the United States.[10]

The latest iteration was rolled out on January 4, 2018 in the United States.
It features a dozen items at various price points: $1, $2 and $3, with four
items per price point.[11] It no longer featured fries, which was criticized
by _Good Mythical Morning_ along with the lack of items at the $1 price
point.[12] In Canada, fries are available for CA$1.59 on the Value Picks
menu.[13]

Subway currently offers a $4.99 footlong menu in the United States. The
promotion began in 2004 as a $5 footlong menu (equivalent to $6.63 in 2018).

In 1988, Taco Bell lowered the prices of all new items and launched the first
three-tiered pricing strategy and free drink refills.[15] In 2010, Taco Bell
introduced the $2 Meal Deals menu, featuring a menu item (i.e., a chicken
burrito, a beefy 5-layer burrito, a double decker taco, or a Gordita supreme),
a bag of Doritos, and a medium drink.[16] In August 18, 2014, Taco Bell
launched a new value menu called Dollar Cravings that included eleven food
items each priced a $1.[17][18][19][20]

On December 15, 2017, Taco Bell launched a new advertising campaign called
"The Belluminati" to advertise its Dollar Cravings menu.[21]

Wendy's is generally credited with being the first fast food chain to offer a
value menu in October 1989, with every item priced at $0.99 (equivalent to $2
in 2018).[22][23][24]

