**Wheat flour** is a powder made from the grinding of wheat used for human
consumption. Wheat varieties are called "soft" or "weak" if gluten content is
low, and are called "hard" or "strong" if they have high gluten content. Hard
flour, or _bread flour_ , is high in gluten, with 12% to 14% gluten content,
and its dough has elastic toughness that holds its shape well once baked. Soft
flour is comparatively low in gluten and thus results in a loaf with a finer,
crumbly texture.[1] Soft flour is usually divided into cake flour, which is
the lowest in gluten, and pastry flour, which has slightly more gluten than
cake flour.

In terms of the parts of the grain (the grass fruit) used in flour—the
endosperm or protein/starchy part, the germ or protein/fat/vitamin-rich part,
and the bran or fiber part—there are three general types of flour. White flour
is made from the endosperm only. Brown flour includes some of the grain's germ
and bran, while whole grain or _wholemeal flour_ is made from the entire
grain, including the bran, endosperm, and germ. Germ flour is made from the
endosperm and germ, excluding the bran.

To produce refined ( _white_ ) wheat flour,[2] grain is usually tempered, i.e.
moisture added to the grain, before milling, to optimize milling efficiency.
This softens the starchy "endosperm" portion of the wheat kernel, which will
be separated out in the milling process to produce what is known to consumers
as _white flour_. The addition of moisture also stiffens the bran and
ultimately reduces the energy input required to shatter the kernel, while at
the same time avoiding the shattering of bran and germ particles to be
separated out in this milling process by sieving or sifting.

The endosperm portion of the kernel makes up about 80% of the volume and is
desirable because the products made from this white flour are often considered
to have milder flavor, smoother texture, and, in the case of bread, greater
volume. The balance of the kernel is composed of the bran and the germ which
tend to be coarser. With the invention of the roller milling system in the
late 19th century, the bran and the germ were able to be removed, dramatically
improving the appeal of baked products to the public.

The moistened grain is first passed through the series of break rollers, then
sieved to separate out the fine particles that make up white flour. The
balance are intermediate particles of endosperm (otherwise known as product
_middling_ or _farina_ ) and coarse particles of bran and germ. The middling
then makes multiple passes through the reduction rolls, and is again sieved
after each pass to maximize extraction of white flour from the endosperm,
while removing coarser bran and germ particles.

To produce _whole wheat_ flour, 100% of the bran and germ must be reintroduced
to the white flour that the roller milling system was originally designed to
separate it from. Therefore, these elements are first ground on another mill
(usually a pin mill). These finer bran and germ fractions are then
reintroduced to the endosperm ( _white flour_ ) to produce whole wheat flour
made of 100% of the kernel of wheat.

Wheat flour is available in many varieties; the categorization is regional,
and the same name may have several different regional meanings.

Indian flours are generally categorized by how much of the grain is stripped
away.

American flours are categorized by gluten/protein content, processing, and
use.

A device called Alveograph Chopin, invented in 1921 by Marcel Chopin, provides
an index called W that is now commonly used by professional bakers. W index
measures the flour strength. The maximum of the curve, identified by P,
represents the toughness of gluten, while L represents the extensibility; the
higher the value of L the more elastic the dough will be.

**Flours between 90 and 160 W** are called "weak flours". They have a low
protein content, usually 9%, used to produce biscuits or cakes.

**Flours between 160 and 250 W** have a medium force. They are used, for
example, for Pugliese bread, pizza and focaccia.

**Flours > 300 W** Flours with a high W are called "strong flours" because
they have a great resistance to the deformation of gluten.

In general, the longer rising time a bread product requires, the more a flour
will need a high W, because it better retains the carbon dioxide produced in
the fermentation.[7]

During World War II, the British government promoted "National Flour"; it was
adopted in 1942 as a healthy and economic alternative to importing wheat.[8]
The flour is described as being of 85% extraction, i.e. containing more of the
whole wheat grain than refined flour, generally described as 70% extraction at
the time. Parliamentary questions on the exact constitution of National Flour
in 1943 reveal that it was "milled from a grist consisting of 90 per cent.
wheat and 10 per cent. diluent grains. Authorised additions are calcium at the
rate of 7 oz (200 g) per 280 lb (130 kg) of flour and dried milk at the rate
of 2 lb (910 g) per 280 lb (130 kg) of flour and customary improvers in normal
proportions." The diluent grains were barley, oats and rye and customary
improvers were "certain oxidising agents which improve the quality of the
bread baked from the flour, and their nature depends on the kind of grain
used, whether hard or soft.".[9] A survey of the composition of National Flour
was conducted for the period 1946–1950.[10] National Flour was discontinued in
1956 against the recommendations of the MRC[8] as the government considered
that the addition of nutritional supplements to refined flour removed the
necessity for using National Flour on health grounds.

National Flour was also a term for a flour introduced in Kenya by the colonial
government which contained 70% wheat flour and 30% maize flour.[11]

