**Today's featured article archive**

**Featured content:**

**Today's featured article** (TFA):

**Featured article tools:**

_**The Mummy**_ is a 1999 American action horror film written and directed by
Stephen Sommers and starring Brendan Fraser _(pictured)_ , Rachel Weisz, John
Hannah, Kevin J. O'Connor, and Arnold Vosloo. In this film, a loose remake of
a film of the same name from 1932, adventurers accidentally awaken Imhotep, a
high priest from Pharaoh Seti I's reign who has been cursed for eternity.
Filming began in Marrakesh, Morocco, in May 1998; the crew had to endure
dehydration, sandstorms, and snakes while filming in the Sahara. The visual
effects were provided by Industrial Light & Magic, who blended film and
computer-generated imagery to create the mummy. The film opened on May 7,
1999, and went on to gross $416 million worldwide. The box-office success led
to two sequels, _The Mummy Returns_ (2001) and _The Mummy: Tomb of the Dragon
Emperor_ (2008), as well as an animated series, and a prequel, _The Scorpion
King_. The film also inspired a roller coaster, _Revenge of the Mummy_ , in
three Universal Studios Theme Parks. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Lawrence Weathers** (1890–1918) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria
Cross, the highest award for gallantry in battle that could be awarded to a
member of the Australian armed forces at the time. He enlisted in the
Australian Imperial Force in early 1916, and joined the 43rd Battalion. His
unit deployed to the Western Front in France and Belgium in late December.
Weathers took part in the Battle of Messines in June 1917, and was wounded.
Rejoining his unit in December, Weathers fought during the German Spring
Offensive, but was gassed in May and did not return to his unit until the
following month. He participated in the Battle of Hamel in July, the Battle of
Amiens in August, and the Battle of Mont Saint-Quentin in September. At Mont
Saint-Quentin, he was recommended for the award of the Victoria Cross based on
his actions on 2 September. He was mortally wounded by a shell on 29 September
during the Battle of St Quentin Canal, never having been aware that he was to
receive the Victoria Cross. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

The **September 2014 tour** by the alternative rock band the Breeders included
thirteen concerts in the central and western United States. The tour featured
the lineup from their 1993 album _Last Splash_ , with Josephine Wiggs, Jim
Macpherson, Kim Deal, and Kelley Deal _(pictured with Wiggs in 2009)_. Invited
to open for Neutral Milk Hotel's September 18 concert at the Hollywood Bowl,
they planned a tour to lead up to this show, using the opportunity to practice
some recent compositions. They performed in eleven cities, including St.
Louis, Denver, Seattle, Portland, San Francisco, and Las Vegas. The group then
played at the Hollywood Bowl concert, and finished the tour on September 20 at
the Goose Island 312 Urban Block Party event in Chicago. As well as their new
songs, they performed numerous selections from _Last Splash_ and _Pod_ (1990).
Music critics commented that the performances were rousing, and that the band
was as good as—or better than—in its heyday. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Sasha** (born 4 September 1969) is a Welsh DJ and record producer, best
known for his live events, electronic music as a solo artist, and
collaborations with British DJ John Digweed. He topped _DJ Magazine_'s _Top
100 DJs_ poll in 2000, and is a four-time International Dance Music Awards
winner, four-time DJ Awards winner and Grammy Award nominee. He began his
career playing acid house dance music in the late 1980s. In 1993 he partnered
with Digweed, touring internationally. Sasha has remixed tracks for artists
including Madonna, The Chemical Brothers and Hot Chip. He has produced three
albums of original works: _The Qat Collection_ in 1994, _Airdrawndagger_ in
2002 and _Scene Delete_ in 2016. His use of live audio engineering equipment
helped popularise technological innovations among DJs who formerly relied on
records and turntables. In 2007 he formed a record label with Renaissance
Records called emFire. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

In the **1950 United States Senate election in California** , Republican
Richard Nixon _(pictured)_ defeated Democrat Helen Gahagan Douglas in a
campaign characterized by accusations and name-calling. Democratic incumbent
Sheridan Downey withdrew during the primary election campaign, after which
publisher Manchester Boddy joined the race; both attacked Douglas as a
leftist. Nixon and Douglas won the primaries, and at the time of the Red
Scare, tried to paint each other as sympathetic to communism; Nixon had more
success doing so. Democrats were slow to rally to Douglas, and some even
endorsed Nixon, who defeated Douglas by almost 20 percentage points in the
November 7 election. Though Nixon was later criticized for his tactics in the
campaign, he defended his actions and stated that Douglas was too far to the
left for California's voters. The campaign gave rise to two political
nicknames, "the Pink Lady" for Douglas and "Tricky Dick" for Nixon. ( **Full
article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

The **effects of Hurricane Isabel in Delaware** were compounded by flooding
from the remnants of Tropical Storm Henri days before and resulted in a
presidential disaster declaration for the U.S. state. Hurricane Isabel formed
on September 6, 2003, in the tropical Atlantic Ocean and reached recorded peak
winds of 165 mph (265 km/h) on September 11. It made landfall on the Outer
Banks of North Carolina with recorded winds of 105 mph (165 km/h) on September
18. It quickly weakened over land and became extratropical over Pennsylvania
the next day. Roughly six million people were left without electric service in
the eastern United States from its strong winds. Sixteen deaths in seven
states were directly related to the hurricane, with 35 deaths in six states
and one Canadian province indirectly related, though none in Delaware. Overall
damage totalled about $5.5 billion, of which $40 million was associated with
Delaware. ( **Full article...**)

_Part of the **Hurricane Isabel** series, one of Wikipedia's featured topics._

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**George Hirst** (7 September 1871 – 10 May 1954) was a professional English
cricketer who played first-class cricket for Yorkshire, mainly between 1891
and 1921. He played in 24 Test matches for England, touring Australia twice.
He was a left arm medium-fast bowler and right-handed batsman who completed
the double of 1,000 runs and 100 wickets in a season 14 times. He recorded
36,356 runs and 2,742 wickets taken in first-class cricket and 790 runs and 59
wickets in Tests. Hirst was regarded as a specialist batsman until around
1900, when he learned to make the ball swing in flight, making his bowling
difficult to counter. He scored 341 runs in an innings against Leicestershire
in 1905, and made a unique double of 2,000 runs and 200 wickets in 1906. He
played in all England's home Test series between 1899 and 1909, although less
successfully than for his county. He played occasionally for Yorkshire after
the war, retiring to coach at Eton, while also training youths from other
social backgrounds. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

_**Wipeout 3**_ is a racing video game developed by Psygnosis and published by
Sony Computer Entertainment for the PlayStation console, first released on 8
September 1999. In this third game in the _Wipeout_ series, players control
extremely fast anti-gravity ships in a futuristic setting and use weapons to
force other contenders out of the race. Psygnosis hired the British design
studio Designers Republic to develop the game's look and feel, wanting a
futuristic yet plausible setting. The game's soundtrack was assembled from
electronica artists including The Chemical Brothers and Orbital, as well as
other performers. Critics praised _Wipeout 3_ 's audiovisual presentation,
with complaints leveled at the game's unforgiving learning curve and controls.
Despite overall positive reception, the game was a financial disappointment.
_Wipeout 3 Special Edition_ , featuring additional content, was released in
2000, and the next entry in the series, _Wipeout Fusion_ , was released for
the PlayStation 2 in 2002. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

_**Ambondro mahabo**_ is a mammal from the middle Jurassic (about 167 million
years ago) of Madagascar. The only species of the genus _Ambondro_ , it is
known from a fragmentary lower jaw with three teeth _(pictured)_ , interpreted
as the last premolar and the first two molars. The premolar consists of a
central cusp with one or two smaller cusps and a cingulum (shelf) on the
inner, or lingual, side of the tooth. The molars have a similar cingulum,
three cusps at the front, and a talonid with a main cusp, a smaller cusp, and
a crest at the back. Features of the talonid suggest that _Ambondro_ had
tribosphenic molars, the basic arrangement of molar features also present in
marsupial and placental mammals. It is the oldest known mammal with putatively
tribosphenic teeth; at the time of its discovery it antedated the second
oldest example by about 25 million years. ( **Full article...**)

_Part of the **Mesozoic mammals of Madagascar** series, one of Wikipedia's
featured topics._

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**John J. Crittenden** (September 10, 1787 – July 26, 1863) was an American
politician. He was the 17th governor of Kentucky, and represented the state in
both the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate. He also served as
United States Attorney General in the administrations of William Henry
Harrison, John Tyler and Millard Fillmore. Lame duck president John Quincy
Adams nominated Crittenden to the U.S. Supreme Court on December 17, 1828, but
supporters of president-elect Andrew Jackson in the Senate voted to allow
Jackson to make his own nomination. While serving in the Senate in December
1860, he authored the Crittenden Compromise, a series of resolutions and
constitutional amendments he hoped would avert the Civil War, but Congress
would not approve them. One of his sons, George B. Crittenden, became a
general in the Confederate Army. Another son, Thomas Leonidas Crittenden,
became a general in the Union Army. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

" **The City of New York vs. Homer Simpson** " is the first episode of _The
Simpsons_ ' ninth season. The 179th episode of the series overall, it was
originally broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on September 21,
1997. Written by Ian Maxtone-Graham, the episode features the Simpson family
traveling to recover the family car, which Barney Gumble had abandoned in
Manhattan with numerous parking tickets and a parking boot. Executive
producers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein suggested that the car be found at
the World Trade Center _(pictured in 2001)_ , as they wanted a location that
would be widely known. The animators painstakingly replicated city landmarks.
The episode received generally positive reviews, and has since been on
accolade lists of _The Simpsons_ episodes. It was taken off syndication in
many areas following the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center, but
had come back into syndication by 2006. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Lancaster's _chevauchée_ of 1346** was a large-scale mounted raid directed
by Henry, Earl of Lancaster, in south western France during the Hundred Years'
War. The main English army had defeated the larger French army at the Battle
of Crécy in August, and French defences in the south west were left weak and
disorganised. Lancaster took advantage by leading a raid between 12 September
and 31 October 1346 while sending other forces into Quercy and the Bazadais.
All three offensives were successful, with Lancaster's _chevauchée_ , of
approximately 2,000 English and Gascon soldiers, meeting no effective
resistance from the French, penetrating 160 miles (260 kilometres) north and
storming the rich city of Poitiers. His force then razed and looted large
areas of Saintonge, Aunis and Poitou, capturing numerous towns, castles and
smaller fortified places as they went. The offensives completely disrupted the
French defences and shifted the focus of the fighting. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

The **Tahiti rail** ( _Gallirallus pacificus_ ) is an extinct bird species
from Tahiti. The rail was first recorded during James Cook's second voyage in
1772–1775, during which it was painted by Georg Forster and described by his
father Johann. It may have also existed on nearby Mehetia. It appears to have
been closely related to the buff-banded rail, and has been confused with that
bird's Tongan subspecies. The Tahiti rail was 9 in (23 cm) long, with white on
its underparts, throat, and "eyebrows". Its upper parts were black with white
dots and bands, the hind neck was rust-coloured, the breast was grey, and it
had a black band across its throat. The bill and iris were red, and the legs
were pink. It was supposedly flightless, and nested on the ground. It
frequented open areas, marshes, and coconut plantations, eating mainly insects
and some coconut meat. Its extinction, after 1844 on Tahiti, and perhaps in
the 1930s on Mehetia, was probably due to predation by humans and introduced
cats and rats. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Thomas F. Mulledy** (1794–1860) was a Catholic priest from Virginia and a
prominent leader of the American Jesuits. He twice served as President of
Georgetown College in Washington, D.C., where he undertook a significant
building campaign. After his first presidency, he was appointed provincial
superior of the Jesuit Maryland province in 1837. The following year, Mulledy
executed the sale of 272 slaves owned by the Maryland Jesuits in order to
relieve the province's mounting debts. After an outcry from his fellow Jesuits
over the immorality of the sale, church authorities in Rome exiled him to Nice
for several years, for insubordination and promoting scandal. Following his
return to the United States in 1843, he became the first President of the
College of the Holy Cross in Massachusetts, where he oversaw the construction
of the college's first building. In his later years, he engaged in preaching
and pastoral work, and assisted Holy Cross during investigations by the Know
Nothing Party. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Operation Paravane** was a British air raid of World War II on the German
battleship _Tirpitz_. The attack on 15 September 1944 by 21 Royal Air Force
heavy bombers did irreparable damage, rendering the ship unfit for combat. A
series of raids conducted from April to August by Royal Navy aircraft carriers
had sought unsuccessfully to sink or disable the battleship at her anchorage
in Kaafjord in the far north of German-occupied Norway, but encountered
formidable German defences. In September, Avro Lancaster bombers from two
elite squadrons of the RAF Bomber Command, flying from an airfield in the
Soviet Union, attacked using heavy bombs and air-dropped mines. All of the
British aircraft returned to base. The Allies were unable to confirm the
extent of the battleship's damage, and conducted two further heavy bomber
raids against her in late 1944 that sank the ship with considerable loss of
life. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Kevin Beattie** (18 December 1953 – 16 September 2018) was an English
footballer. Born into poverty, he played at both professional and
international levels, mostly as a centre-half. He spent the majority of his
playing career at Ipswich Town, with whom he won both the FA Cup and the UEFA
Cup. He was named the inaugural Professional Footballers' Association Young
Player of the Year at the end of the 1972–73 season. He suffered a variety of
injuries, and his playing career included some controversy, such as when he
went missing when selected for England's under-23 team. After retiring from
playing, he descended into alcohol abuse before finding a new career in later
life as a football commentator on television and radio. Beattie has been
called Ipswich Town's best ever player by many pundits and polls. Former
Ipswich (and later England) manager Bobby Robson called him the best England
player he had seen. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Harriet Tubman** (c. March 1822 – March 10, 1913) was an African-American
abolitionist and political activist. Born into slavery, Tubman escaped in
1849, then returned 13 times to rescue approximately 70 of her enslaved family
and friends. Traveling by night, she used a network of antislavery activists
and safe houses known as the Underground Railroad. After the Fugitive Slave
Act of 1850 was passed, she helped fugitives go farther north into British
North America, and helped newly freed slaves find work. Tubman met John Brown
in 1858, and helped him plan and recruit for his 1859 raid on Harpers Ferry.
When the Civil War began, she worked for the Union Army, first as a cook and
nurse, and then as an armed scout and spy. The first woman to lead an armed
expedition in the war, she guided the raid at Combahee Ferry, which liberated
more than 700 slaves. Later in life she was an activist for women's suffrage.
After her death, she was celebrated as an American icon. ( **Full
article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**James Park Woods** (1886–1963) was an Australian recipient of the Victoria
Cross, the highest award for gallantry in the face of the enemy that could be
awarded to members of the Australian armed forces at the time. Woods enlisted
in the Australian Imperial Force in September 1916, and joined the 48th
Battalion in France in September 1917. He participated in the First Battle of
Passchendaele the following month. In 1918, Woods was hospitalised twice,
finally returning to his unit in mid-August. On 18 September, the 48th
Battalion was involved in the attack on the Hindenburg Outpost Line. During
this battle Woods led a four-man patrol in an attack on a strong German post,
inflicting severe casualties and driving more than thirty Germans from the
position. His actions during this assault and subsequent defence against
German counter-attacks resulted in him being awarded the Victoria Cross. His
medals are now displayed in the Hall of Valour at the Australian War Memorial.
( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

_**Suillus bovinus**_ , the Jersey cow mushroom, is a bolete in the family
Suillaceae. A common fungus native to Europe and Asia, it has been introduced
to North America and Australia. It was initially described as _Boletus
bovinus_ by Carl Linnaeus in 1753, and given its current binomial name by
Henri François Anne de Roussel in 1806. It is an edible mushroom, though not
highly regarded. The fungus grows in coniferous forests in its native range,
and pine plantations elsewhere. It is sometimes parasitised by the related
mushroom _Gomphidius roseus_. _S. bovinus_ produces spore-bearing mushrooms,
often in large numbers, each with a convex grey-yellow or ochre cap reaching
up to 10 cm (4 in) in diameter, flattening with age. As in other boletes, the
cap has spore tubes extending downward from the underside, rather than gills.
The pore surface is yellow. The stalk, more slender than those of other
_Suillus_ boletes, lacks a ring. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

_**Sutton Hoo Helmet**_ is a 2002 sculpture by the English artist Rick Kirby.
A representation of the Anglo-Saxon helmet of the same name found in the
Sutton Hoo ship-burial, it was commissioned by the National Trust to hang
outside the Sutton Hoo visitor centre. Together with the centre, the sculpture
was unveiled by Nobel laureate Seamus Heaney on 13 March 2002. Weighing 900 kg
(2,000 lb), it is 1.8 m (5.9 ft) high, 1.2 m (3.9 ft) wide and 1.6 m (5.2 ft)
deep. It is made of mild steel plates that are coloured red. Designed to have
a "fierce presence", it is inspired by the fragmentary appearance of the
reconstructed helmet rather than the glistening replica made by the Royal
Armouries. Steel is Kirby's favoured medium, allowing the sense of scale and
dramatic impact found in _Sutton Hoo Helmet_. The sculpture is illustrative of
Kirby's largely figural body of work, and its mask-like quality has been
repeated in subsequent pieces. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Herbig–Haro objects** are bright nebular patches formed when narrow jets of
partially ionized gas ejected from newborn stars collide with clouds of gas
and dust. Often aligned with a star's rotational axis, they are ubiquitous in
star-forming regions. Most of them lie within a few light-years of the source.
They are transient phenomena, lasting around a few tens of thousands of years.
They can change visibly over just a few years, as they move rapidly away from
their parent star. First observed in the late 19th century by Sherburne Wesley
Burnham, Herbig–Haro objects were not recognized as distinct from other
emission nebulas until the 1940s. The first astronomers to study them in
detail were George Herbig and Guillermo Haro, who independently recognized
that the objects were by-products of the star formation process. Although the
objects emit visible wavelengths, many are hidden by dust and gas, and can
only be seen at infrared wavelengths. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

An **ashcan copy** is a type of American comic book originally created solely
to establish trademarks on potential titles and not intended for sale. It was
developed by publishers including All-American Publications _(logo pictured)_
and Fawcett Comics to gain legal protection for titles intended to sound
thrilling. An ashcan copy was the same size as a regular comic book and
usually had a black and white cover. The practice became common in the 1930s
and 1940s when the comic book industry was in its infancy, but was phased out
after updates to US trademark law. The term was revived in the 1980s by Bob
Burden, who applied it to prototypes of his self-published comic book. Since
the 1990s, the term has been used to describe promotional materials produced
in large print runs and made available for mass consumption. In the film and
television industries, the term has been adopted for low-grade material
created to preserve a claim to licensed property rights. ( **Full
article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

_**The Shawshank Redemption**_ is an American drama film written and directed
by Frank Darabont, first released on September 23, 1994. Based on the 1982
Stephen King novella _Rita Hayworth and Shawshank Redemption_ , it tells the
story of banker Andy Dufresne (Tim Robbins, _pictured_ ), who is sentenced to
life in Shawshank State Penitentiary for the murder of his wife and her lover,
despite his claims of innocence. Over the following two decades, he befriends
a fellow prisoner, contraband smuggler Ellis "Red" Redding (Morgan Freeman),
and becomes instrumental in a money laundering operation led by the prison
warden Samuel Norton (Bob Gunton). The film received positive reviews, but
earned only $16 million during its initial theatrical run. After garnering
seven Academy Award nominations, it was one of the top rented films of 1995,
and totaled $58.3 million at the box office after a theatrical re-release. In
2015 the Library of Congress selected the film for preservation in the
National Film Registry. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

The **_Edmontosaurus_ mummy** in the American Museum of Natural History is an
exceptionally well-preserved fossil of a dinosaur, the first found to include
a skeleton encased in skin impressions; almost two-thirds of the skin is
preserved. Discovered in 1908 in the United States near Lusk, Wyoming, it is
ascribed to the species _Edmontosaurus annectens_ , a hadrosaurid (duck-billed
dinosaur). It was discovered lying on its back, its neck twisted backwards and
its forelimbs outstretched. After dehydration and burial of the carcass,
bacteria consolidated the surrounding sediments, resulting in its excellent
preservation. Skin impressions found in between the fingers were once
interpreted as evidence for an aquatic lifestyle. The mummy was found by
fossil hunter Charles Hazelius Sternberg and his three sons in the Lance
Formation. Although Sternberg was working under contract to the British Museum
of Natural History, Henry Fairfield Osborn managed to secure the mummy for the
American museum. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**SOLRAD 2** was an unsuccessful surveillance and scientific satellite
developed by the U.S. Naval Research Laboratory. Like the similar SOLRAD 1
satellite _(pictured)_ , it was intended to measure solar X-rays and
ultraviolet radiation while conducting a covert surveillance mission, mapping
the Soviet Union's air defense radar network with its onboard Galactic
Radiation and Background electronic surveillance package. SOLRAD 1, launched
in June 1960, had been the first satellite to observe solar X-rays, confirming
the connection between increased solar X-ray activity and radio fade-outs, and
the first to conduct surveillance from orbit, revealing a Soviet network that
was more extensive than had been expected. SOLRAD 2 was launched along with
the Transit 3A satellite atop a Thor DM-21 Ablestar  rocket on November 30,
1960, but both satellites failed to reach orbit when the booster flew off
course and was destroyed. Debris rained down over Cuba, prompting protests
from the Cuban government. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

The **Louisiana Purchase Sesquicentennial half dollar** was a proposed United
States commemorative coin. Intended for the 150th anniversary of the Louisiana
Purchase ( _shown in white_ ), the coin was sought by both the Missouri
Historical Society (MHS) and the Louisiana Purchase 150th Anniversary
Association of New Orleans, led by Clay Shaw; they hoped to be able to buy the
entire coin issue from the government and sell it at a profit. Numismatist
Eric P. Newman advocated for the bill on behalf of the MHS. The House of
Representatives passed authorizing legislation in April 1953, but the Senate
was slow to act, passing it in January 1954. The Treasury Department strongly
opposed the bill, and President Dwight D. Eisenhower vetoed it and two other
commemorative coin bills on February 3, 1954; Congress made no attempt to
override the vetoes. No commemorative coins were authorized or issued by the
United States after 1954 until a new issue was struck in 1982. ( **Full
article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Mount Mazama** is a complex volcano in the Cascade Range whose collapsed
caldera holds Crater Lake _(pictured)_ , the deepest freshwater body in the
US, at 1,943 feet (592 m). In North America, only Great Slave Lake in Canada
is deeper. Mount Mazama, within Crater Lake National Park, is in the Oregon
segment of the Cascade Volcanic Arc. The mountain's elevation before its
climactic eruption about 7,700 years ago was around 12,000 feet (3,700 m), but
is now 8,157 feet (2,486 m). Mount Mazama formed as a group of overlapping
volcanic edifices including shield volcanoes and small composite cones,
becoming active intermittently until its big eruption. Mazama is dormant, but
the United States Geological Survey says that eruptions on a smaller scale are
likely, and that these could pose a threat to its surroundings. Indigenous
populations have inhabited the area around Mazama and Crater Lake for at least
10,000 years. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Ray Emery** (September 28, 1982 – July 15, 2018) was a professional ice
hockey goaltender from Canada who played in the National Hockey League (NHL)
for 11 seasons. He was chosen 99th overall by the Ottawa Senators in the 2001
NHL Entry Draft. During the 2006–07 season, he led the Senators to the Stanley
Cup Finals. It was the modern Senators' first appearance in the finals. He won
a Stanley Cup championship with the Chicago Blackhawks in 2013. Emery received
numerous awards and accolades. In April 2013, he won the William M. Jennings
Trophy along with teammate Corey Crawford for giving up the fewest goals in
the season. Emery finished the 2012–13 season with a 1.94 goals against
average statistic and a 0.922 save percentage, and became the first NHL
goaltender ever to start a season with 12 straight wins. He was a two-time
Bill Masterton Memorial Trophy finalist for his dedication and perseverance. (
**Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**Chartwell** is a English country house near the town of Westerham, Kent. For
over forty years it was the home of Winston Churchill, who lived there until
shortly before his death in January 1965. In the 1930s, when Churchill was
excluded from political office, Chartwell became the centre of his world. At
his dining table, he gathered those who could assist his campaign against
German re-armament and the British government's response of appeasement; in
his study, he composed speeches and wrote books; in his garden, he built
walls, constructed lakes and painted. During the Second World War Chartwell
was largely unused, the Churchills returning after he lost the 1945 election.
In 1953, when he was again Prime Minister, the house became his refuge after a
devastating stroke. From the garden front, the house has extensive views over
the Weald of Kent, "the most beautiful and charming" Churchill had ever seen.
It was opened to the public by the National Trust in 1966. ( **Full
article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

**IFF Mark II** was the first operational identification friend or foe system,
developed by the Royal Air Force just before World War II. The Mark I, its
predecessor, amplified the signals of the British Chain Home radar systems,
triggering a radar display blip. It required manual tuning, and operators
could not always distinguish between an enemy aircraft and a friendly one with
a maladjusted IFF. The Mark II, deployed at the end of the Battle of Britain
in late 1940, fixed this problem with an automatic gain control and three
automatic tuners that covered a wider selection of radars. The Mark II's
frequencies were sufficient for the early war period, but by 1942 many more
radars were in use, including incompatible ones based on the cavity magnetron.
The IFF Mark III eliminated the multiple tuners and operated on a single
frequency that could be used with any radar; it entered service in 1943 and
quickly replaced the Mark II. ( **Full article...**)

view – talk – edit – history – watch

