The **Manual of Style** ( **MoS** or **MOS** ) is the style manual for all
English Wikipedia articles. This primary page is supported by further detail
pages, which are cross-referenced here and listed at Wikipedia:Manual of
Style/Contents. If any contradiction arises, _this page always has
precedence_.[1]

The MoS presents Wikipedia's house style, to help editors write articles with
consistent and precise language, layout, and formatting, making Wikipedia
easier and more intuitive for users. Plain English works best. Avoid
ambiguity, jargon, and vague or unnecessarily complex wording.

Style and formatting should be consistent within an article. Where more than
one style is acceptable under MoS, editors should not change an article from
one of those styles to another without a good reason. Edit warring over
optional styles is unacceptable.[2] If a style or similar debate becomes
intractable, see if a rewrite can make the issue moot.

New content added to this page should directly address a _persistently
recurring_ style issue.

A title should be a recognizable name or description of the topic that is
natural, sufficiently precise, concise, and consistent with those of related
articles. If these criteria are in conflict, they should be balanced against
one another.

For formatting guidance see the WP:Article titles § Article title format
section, noting the following:

Subject both to the above and to WP:Article titles, the rest of the MoS,
particularly § Punctuation, applies also to the title.

See also Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Titles, for cases where a Wikipedia article
about a published work has a title that coincides with the work's title.

An article should begin with an introductory _lead section_ – a concise
summary of the article – which is never divided into sections (see
Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Lead section). The remainder of the article is
typically divided into sections.

Infoboxes, images, and related content in the lead section must be right-
aligned.

If an article has at least four section headings, a navigable table of
contents appears automatically, just after the lead.

If the topic of a section is covered in more detail in a dedicated article
(see Wikipedia:Summary style), insert `{{main|Article name}}` immediately
under the section heading.

As explained in detail in WP:Manual of Style/Layout § Standard appendices and
footers, optional appendix and footer sections may appear after the body of
the article, in the following order:

Other article elements include disambiguation hatnotes (normally placed at the
very top of the article) and infoboxes (usually placed before the lead
section).

Section headings should follow all of the guidance for article titles (above),
and should be presented in sentence case (Funding of UNESCO projects), not
title case (Funding of UNESCO Projects).[a]

Use equals signs around a section heading: `==Title==` for a primary section,
`===Title===` for a subsection, and so on to `======Title======`, with no
level skipped. `=Title=` is never used.[d] Spaces around the title are
optional and ignored, e.g. `== Title ==`.

Section headings should:

These restrictions are necessary to avoid technical complications, and are not
subject to override by local consensus or WP:IAR.

In addition, as a matter of consistent style section headings should:

These are broadly accepted community preferences.

An invisible comment on the same line must be _inside_ the `== ==` markup:[e]

`==<!--This comment works fine-->Implications== `  
`==Implications==<!--This comment causes problems--> `  

It is more usual practice to put such comments _below_ the heading.

Before changing a heading, consider whether you might be breaking existing
links to it. If there are many links to the old title, create an anchor with
that title to ensure that these still work. Similarly, when linking to a
section, leave an invisible comment at the heading of the target section,
naming the linking articles, so that if the heading is later altered these can
be fixed. Combined example:

which will be saved in the article as:

The above guidance about sentence case, redundancy, images, and questions also
applies to headers of tables (and of table columns and rows). However, table
headings can incorporate citations and may begin with, or be, numbers. Unlike
page headings, table headers do not automatically generate link anchors. Aside
from sentence case in glossaries, the heading advice also applies to the
_term_ entries in description lists. If using template-structured glossaries,
terms will automatically have link anchors, but will not otherwise. Citations
for description-list content go in the _term_ or _definition_ element, as
needed.

Sometimes the MoS provides more than one acceptable style, or gives no
specific guidance. The Arbitration Committee has expressed the principle that
"When either of two styles are [ _sic_ ] acceptable it is inappropriate for a
Wikipedia editor to change from one style to another unless there is some
substantial reason for the change."[3] If you believe an alternative style
would be more appropriate for a particular article, discuss this at the
article's talk page or – if it raises an issue of more general application or
with the MoS itself – at the MoS talk page.

Edit-warring over style, or enforcing optional style in a bot-like fashion
without prior consensus, is never acceptable.[2][4]

The English Wikipedia prefers no national variety of English over any other.
These varieties (for example American English or British English) differ in
vocabulary ( _elevator_ vs. _lift_ ), spelling ( _center_ vs. _centre_ ), date
formatting ("September 11, 2019" vs. "11 September 2019"), and occasionally
grammar (see § Plurals, below). Articles such as English plurals and
Comparison of American and British English provide information about such
differences.

_Within a given article_ the conventions of one particular variety should be
followed consistently. Exceptions include:

For an international encyclopedia, using vocabulary common to all varieties of
English is preferable.

An article on a topic that has strong ties to a particular English-speaking
nation should use the (formal, not colloquial) English of that nation. For
example:

For topics with strong ties to Commonwealth of Nations countries and other
former British territory, use Commonwealth English orthography, largely
indistinguishable from British English in encyclopedic writing (excepting
Canada, which uses a different orthography).

When an English variety's consistent usage has been established in an article,
maintain it in the absence of consensus to the contrary. With few exceptions
(e.g., when a topic has strong national ties or a term/spelling carries less
ambiguity), there is no valid reason for changing from one acceptable option
to another.

When no English variety has been established and discussion does not resolve
the issue, use the variety found in the first post-stub revision that
introduced an identifiable variety. The established variety in a given article
can be documented by placing the appropriate _Varieties of English_ template
on its talk page.

An article should not be edited or renamed simply to switch from one variety
of English to another. The `{{subst:uw-lang}}` template may be placed on an
editor's talk page to explain this.

Wikipedia article titles and section headings use sentence case, not title
case; see WP:Article titles and § Section headings. For capitalization of list
items, see § Bulleted and numbered lists. Other points concerning
capitalization are summarized below; full information can be found at
WP:Manual of Style/Capital letters.

Generally, do not capitalize the word _the_ in mid-sentence: throughout the
United Kingdom, not throughout The United Kingdom. Conventional exceptions
include certain proper names (he visited The Hague) and most titles of
creative works (Tolkien wrote _The Lord of the Rings_ —but be aware that _the_
may not be part of the title itself e.g. Homer composed the _Odyssey_ ).

For _the_ in band names, see WP:Manual of Style/Music § Names (definite
article).

The English-language titles of compositions (books and other print works,
songs and other audio works, films and other visual media works, paintings and
other artworks, etc.) are given in _title case_ , in which every word is given
an initial capital except for certain less important words (as detailed at
WP:Manual of Style/Capital letters § Composition titles). The first and last
words in an English-language title are always capitalized.

Capitalization in foreign-language titles varies, even over time within the
same language; generally, retain the style of the original for modern works,
and follow the usage in English-language reliable sources for historical
works. Many of these items should also be in italics, or enclosed in quotation
marks.

When using **taxonomic ("scientific") names** , capitalize and italicize the
genus: _Berberis_ , _Erithacus_. (Supergenus and subgenus, when applicable,
are treated the same way.) Italicize but do not capitalize taxonomic ranks at
the level of species and below: _Berberis darwinii_ , _Erithacus rubecula
superbus_ , _Acacia coriacea_ subsp. _sericophylla_ ; no exception is made for
proper names forming part of scientific names. Higher taxa (order, family,
etc.) are capitalized in Latin (Carnivora, Felidae) but not in their English
equivalents (carnivorans, felids); they are not italicized in either form,
except for viruses, where all names accepted by the ICTV are italicized (
_Retroviridae_ ).

**Cultivar** and **cultivar group** names of plants are not italicized, and
are capitalized (including the word _Group_ in the name); cultivar names
appear within single quotes ( _Malus domestica_ 'Red Delicious'), while
cultivar groups do not ( _Cynara cardunculus_ Scolymus Group).

**Englishvernacular ("common") names** are given in lower case in article
prose (plains zebra, mountain maple, and southwestern red-tailed hawk) and in
sentence case at the start of sentences and in other places where the first
letter of the first word is capitalized.[a] They are additionally capitalized
where they contain proper names: Przewalski's horse, California condor, and
fair-maid-of-France. This applies to species and subspecies, as in the
previous examples, as well as to general names for groups or types of
organism: bird of prey, oak, great apes, Bryde's whales, mountain dog, poodle,
Van cat, wolfdog. When the common name coincides with a scientific taxon, do
not capitalize or italicize, except where addressing the organism
taxonomically: A lynx is any of the four medium-sized wild cat species within
the genus _Lynx_. Non-English vernacular names, when relevant to include, are
handled like any other foreign-language terms: italicized as such, and
capitalized only if the rules of the native language require it. Non-English
names that have become English-assimilated are treated as English (ayahuasca,
okapi).

**Standardized breeds** should generally retain the capitalization used in the
breed standards.[f] Examples: German Shepherd dog, Russian White goat, Berlin
Short-faced Tumbler. As with plant cultivars, this applies whether or not the
included noun is a proper name, in contrast to how vernacular names of species
are written. However, unlike cultivars, breeds are never put in single
quotation marks, and their names are never part of a scientific name. A
species term appended at the end for disambiguation ("cat", "hound", "horse",
"swine", etc.) should not be capitalized, unless it is a part of the breed
name itself and is consistently presented that way in the breed standard(s)
(rare cases include Norwegian Forest Cat and American Quarter Horse).

Create redirects from alternative capitalization and spelling forms of article
titles, and from alternative names, e.g., Adélie Penguin, Adelie penguin,
Adelie Penguin and _Pygoscelis adeliae_ should all redirect to Adélie penguin.

Do not capitalize **directions** such as _north_ , nor their related forms (We
took the northern road), except where they are parts of proper names (Great
North Road, Great Western Drive, South Pole).

Capitalize **names of regions** if they have attained proper-name status,
including informal conventional names (Southern California; the Western
Desert), and derived terms for people (e.g., a _Southerner_ as someone from
the Southern United States). Do not capitalize descriptive names for regions
that have not attained the status of proper names, such as southern Poland.

Composite directions may or may not be hyphenated, depending on the variety of
English adopted in the article. Southeast Asia and northwest are more common
in American English; but South-East Asia and north-west in British English. In
cases such as north–south dialogue and east–west orientation, use an en dash;
see § En dashes: other uses.

Capitalize names of particular institutions (the founding of the University of
Delhi; the history of Stanford University) but not generic words for
institutions (the high school is near the university). Do not capitalize _the_
at the start of an institution's name, regardless of the institution's
preferred style.

Treat political or geographic units similarly: The city has a population of
55,000; The two towns merged to become the City of Smithville. Do not mimic
the style of local newspapers which refer to their municipality as "the City"
or "The City"; an exception is the City of London, referred to as the City.

Ligatures should be used in languages in which they are standard (hence
Moreau's last words were _clin d'œil_ is preferable to Moreau's last words
were _clin d'oeil_ ) but not in English (encyclopedia or encyclopaedia, not
encyclopædia), except in proper names (Æthelstan not Aethelstan).

Abbreviations are shortened forms of words or phrases. In strict analysis,
they are distinct from contractions, which use an apostrophe (e.g., _won't_ ,
see § Contractions), and initialisms. An initialism is formed from some or all
of the initial letters of words in a phrase. Below, references to
abbreviations should be taken to include acronyms, and the term _acronym_ to
apply also to initialisms.

When an abbreviation will be used in an article, first introduce it using the
full expression:

Do not use capitals in the full version merely because capitals are used in
the abbreviation: an early Local Area Network (LAN).

Except in special circumstances, common abbreviations (such as PhD, DNA, USSR)
need not be expanded even on first use.

Pluralize acronyms by adding _-s_ or _-es_ : Three CD-ROMs and two BIOSes were
released. (Do not use apostrophes to form plurals: Three CD-ROM's and two
BIOS's were released.)

An abbreviation may or may not be terminated with a full point (also called a
_period_ or _stop_ ). A consistent style should be maintained within an
article. North American usage is typically to end all abbreviations with a
period/point (Dr. Smith of 42 Drummond St.) but in common British and
Australian usage, no period/point is used if the abbreviation (contraction)
ends in the last letter of the unabbreviated form (Dr Smith of 42 Drummond St)
unless confusion could result. This is also common practice in scientific
writing. Regardless of punctuation, words that are abbreviated to more than
one letter are spaced (op. cit. not op.cit. or opcit). There are some
exceptions: PhD (see above) for "Philosophiae Doctor"; BVetMed for "Bachelor
of Veterinary Medicine". In most situations, Wikipedia uses no such
punctuation inside acronyms and initialisms: GDP, not G.D.P.

While, in principle, either US or U.S. may be used (with internal consistency)
to abbreviate "United States" in any given article, the use or non-use of
periods (full points) should also be consistent with other country
abbreviations in the same article (thus the US, UK, and USSR, not the U.S.,
UK, and USSR). In longer abbreviations (three letters or more) that
incorporate the country's initials (USN, USAID), do not use periods. When the
United States is mentioned with one or more other countries in the same
sentence, U.S. or US may be too informal, especially at the first mention or
as a noun instead of an adjective (France and the United States, not France
and the U.S.). Do not use the spaced U. S. or the archaic U.S. of A., except
when quoting; and do not use U.S.A. or USA except in a quotation, as part of a
proper name (Team USA), or in certain technical or formal uses (e.g., the ISO
3166-1 alpha-3 codes and FIFA country codes).

To indicate _approximately_ , the abbreviation c. (followed by a space and not
italicized) is preferred over _circa_ , _ca._ , or _approx._ The template
`{{circa}}` may be used.

Avoid abbreviations when they might confuse the reader, interrupt the flow, or
appear informal. For example, do not use approx. for approximate or
approximately, except in a technical passage where the term occurs many times
or in an infobox or a data table to reduce width.

Generally avoid devising new abbreviations, especially acronyms (World Union
of Billiards is good as a _translation_ of Union Mondiale de Billard, but
neither it nor the reduction WUB is used by the organization or by independent
sources; use the original name and its official abbreviation, UMB).

If it is necessary to abbreviate in a tight space, such as a column header in
a table, use widely recognized abbreviations. For example, for New Zealand
gross national product, use NZ and GNP, with a link if the term has not
already been written out in the article: NZ GNP. Do not make up initialisms
such as NZGNP.

Either the `<abbr>` element or the `{{abbr}}` template can be used for
abbreviations and acronyms: `<abbr title="World Health
Organization">WHO</abbr>` or `{{abbr|WHO|World Health Organization}}` will
generate WHO; hovering over the rendered text causes a tooltip of the long
form to pop up.

In normal text and headings, use _and_ instead of the ampersand ( _&_ ):
January 1 and 2, not January 1 & 2. But retain an ampersand when it is a
legitimate part of the style of a proper noun, such as in _Up& Down_ or AT&T.
Elsewhere, ampersands may be used with consistency and discretion where space
is extremely limited (e.g. tables and infoboxes). Quotations may be cautiously
modified, especially for consistency where different editions are quoted, as
modern editions of old texts routinely replace ampersands with _and_ (just as
they replace other disused glyphs, ligatures, and abbreviations).

Italics are used for emphasis, rather than boldface or capitals. But overuse
diminishes its effect; consider rewriting instead.

Use `<em>...</em>` or `{{em|...}}` for emphasis. This allows user style sheets
to handle emphasis in a customized way, and helps reusers and translators.[5]

Use italics for the titles of works (such as books, films, television series,
named exhibitions, computer games, music albums, and paintings). The titles of
articles, chapters, songs, episodes, research papers and other short works
instead take double quotation marks. Italics are not used for major religious
works (the Bible, the Quran, the Talmud). Many of these titles should also be
in title case.

Use italics when _mentioning_ a word or character (see Use–mention
distinction) or a string of words up to one sentence (the term _panning_ is
derived from _panorama_ ; the most common letter in English is _e_ ). When a
whole sentence is mentioned, double quotation marks may be used instead, with
consistency (The preposition in _She sat on the chair_ is _on_ ; or The
preposition in "She sat on the chair" is "on"). Quotation marks may also be
used for shorter material to avoid confusion, such as when italics are already
being heavily used in the page for some other purpose (e.g. many non-English
words and phrases). _Mentioning_ (to discuss grammar, wording, punctuation,
etc.) is different from _quoting_ (in which something is usually expressed on
behalf of a quoted source). Quotation is done with quotation marks, never
italics, nor both at once (see § Quotations for details).

A closely related use of italics is when introducing or distinguishing terms:
"The _natural numbers_ are the integers greater than 0."

Use italics for phrases in other languages and for isolated foreign words that
are not common in everyday English. However, proper names (such as place
names) in other languages are not usually italicized, nor are terms in non-
Latin scripts.

Use italics for the scientific names of plants, animals, and all other
organisms except viruses at the genus level and below (italicize _Panthera
leo_ and _Retroviridae_ , but not Felidae). The hybrid sign is not italicized
( _Rosa_ × _damascena_ ), nor is the "connecting term" required in three-part
botanical names ( _Rosa gallica_ subsp. _officinalis_ ).

Don't use italics for quotations. Instead, use quotation marks for short
quotations and block quoting for long ones.

Use italics within quotations to reproduce emphasis that exists in the source
material. If it is not clear that the source already included italics (or some
other styling) for emphasis, add the editorial note [emphasis in original]
after the quotation.

If adding emphasis that was not in the original, add the editorial note
[emphasis added] after the quotation.

Italicize only the elements of the sentence affected by the emphasis. Do not
italicize surrounding punctuation.

For a link to function, any italics markup must be either completely outside
the link markup, or in the link's "piped" portion.

It is sometimes desirable to force a text segment to appear entirely on a
single line‍—‌that is, to prevent a line break (line wrap) from occurring
anywhere within it.

It is desirable to prevent line breaks where breaking across lines might be
confusing or awkward. For example:

Whether a non-breaking space is appropriate depends on context: whereas it is
appropriate to use `12{{nbsp}}MB` in prose, it may be counterproductive in a
table (where horizontal space is precious) and unnecessary in a short
parameter value in an infobox (where a break would never occur anyway).

A line break may occur at a **thin space** (`&thinsp;`, or `{{thinsp}}`),
which is sometimes used to correct too-close placement of adjacent characters.
To prevent this, consider using `{{nobr}}`.

Insert non-breaking and thin spaces symbolically (`{{nbsp}}`, `{{thinsp}}`,
`&nbsp;` or `&thinsp;`), never by entering them directly into the edit window
from the keyboard – they are visually indistinguishable from regular spaces,
and later editors will be unable to see what they are. Inside wikilinks, a
construction such as `[[World War&nbsp;II]]` works as expected, but `[[World
War{{nbsp}}II]]` will not work.

Brief quotations of copyrighted text may be used to illustrate a point,
establish context, or attribute a point of view or idea. While quotations are
an indispensable part of Wikipedia, try not to overuse them. Using too many
quotes is incompatible with an encyclopedic writing style and may be a
copyright infringement. It is generally recommended that content be written in
Wikipedia editors' own words. Consider paraphrasing quotations into plain and
concise text when appropriate (while being aware that close paraphrasing can
still violate copyright).

Quotations must be verifiably attributed, and the wording of the quoted text
should be faithfully reproduced. This is referred to as the **principle of
minimal change**. Where there is good reason to change the wording, enclose
changes within square brackets (for example replacing pronouns with nouns that
aren't identified in the quote: "Ocyrhoe told [her father] his fate" instead
of "Ocyrhoe told him his fate"). If there is a significant error in the
original statement, use `[''[[sic]]'']` or the template `{{sic}}` (produces a
note like [ _sic_ ] ) to show that the error was not made by Wikipedia.
However, trivial spelling and typographic errors should simply be corrected
without comment (for example, correct basicly to basically and harasssment to
harassment), unless the slip is contextually important.

Use ellipses to indicate omissions from quoted text. Legitimate omissions
include extraneous, irrelevant, or parenthetical words, and unintelligible
speech (umm, and hmm). Do not omit text where doing so would remove important
context or alter the meaning of the text. When a vulgarity or obscenity is
quoted, it should appear exactly as it does in the cited source; Wikipedians
should never bowdlerize words by replacing letters with dashes, asterisks, or
other symbols, except when faithfully reproducing quoted text that did so. In
carrying over such an alteration from a quoted source, [[ _sic_ ]] or the
`{{sic}}` template may be used to indicate that the transcription is exact.

In direct quotations, retain dialectal and archaic spellings, including
capitalization (but not archaic glyphs and ligatures, as detailed below).

Quotation should be used, with attribution, to present emotive opinions that
cannot be expressed in Wikipedia's own voice, but never to present cultural
norms as simply opinional:

Concise opinions that are not overly emotive can often be reported with
attribution instead of direct quotation. Use of quotation marks around simple
descriptive terms can often seem to imply something doubtful regarding the
material being quoted; sarcasm or weasel words, like "supposedly" or "so-
called", might be inferred.

A quotation is not a facsimile and, in most cases, it is not a requirement
that the original formatting be preserved. Formatting and other purely
typographical elements of quoted text should be adapted to English Wikipedia's
conventions without comment provided that doing so will not change or obscure
meaning or intent of the text. These are alterations which make no difference
when the text is read aloud, for example:

(See Wikipedia:Manual of Style/Titles § Typographic conformity for special
considerations in normalizing the typography of titles of works.)

However, national varieties should not be changed, as these may involve
changes in vocabulary. For example, a quotation from a British source should
retain British spelling, even in an article that otherwise uses American
spelling. (See § Consistency within articles.)

Direct quotation should not be used to preserve the formatting preferred by an
external publisher (especially when the material would otherwise be
unchanged), as this tends to have the effect of "scare-quoting":

Italics can be used to mark a particular usage as a term of art (a case of
"words as words"), especially when it is unfamiliar or should not be reworded
by a non-expert:

When quoting a complete sentence, it is usually recommended to keep the first
word capitalized. However, if the quoted passage has been integrated into the
surrounding sentence (for example, with an introduction such as "X said
that"), the original capital letter may be lower-cased.

It is not normally necessary to explicitly note changes in capitalization.
However, for more precision, the altered letter may be put inside square
brackets: "The" → "[t]he".

The reader must be able to determine the source of any quotation, at the very
least via a footnote. The source must be named _in article text_ if the
quotation is an opinion (see Wikipedia:Neutral point of view § Attributing and
specifying biased statements). When attributing a quotation, avoid
characterizing it in a biased manner.

See § Double or single.

Be conservative when linking within quotations: link only to targets that
correspond to the meaning clearly intended by the quote's author. Where
possible, link from text outside of the quotation instead – either before it
or soon after. (If quoting hypertext, add an editorial note, [link in
original] or [link added], as appropriate, to avoid ambiguity as to whether
the link was made by the original author.)

Format a long quote (more than about 40 words or a few hundred characters, or
consisting of more than one paragraph, regardless of length) as a block
quotation, indented on both sides. Block quotations can be enclosed in
`{{quote}}` or `<blockquote>...</blockquote>`.

Do not enclose block quotations in quotation marks (and especially avoid
decorative quotation marks in normal use, such as those provided by the
`{{cquote}}` template). Block quotations using a colored background are also
discouraged.

Use `{{quote}}` or `<blockquote>` only for quotations. (See § Indentation for
how to indent in other situations.)

The template also provides parameters for attribution. For use of dashes with
attributions, see § Other uses (em dash only). Below-quote attributions are
not typical in articles. It is more usual to attribute the quotation in an
introductory sentence or fragment, ending with a colon and the source citation
for it. However, quotation templates that support attribution also have
citation parameters for when that format is used. Added citations do not go
within the text of block quotations, since they are not part of the quoted
material. If a citation is used within the `{{quote}}` template or
`<blockquote>` tags, then it must go at the very end of the quotation.

Line breaks and indentation inside a `{{quote}}` or `<blockquote>` are
generally ignored; use `<poem>` for poetry, lyrics, and similar material:

This gives:

What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt, and ominous bird of yore  
Meant in croaking "Nevermore."

Or quote such material inline, with line breaks indicated by `{{nbsp}}/`, and
paragraph or stanza breaks by `{{nbsp}}//`.

Quotations from foreign-language sources should appear with a translation into
English, preferably a modern one. Quotations that are translations should be
explicitly distinguished from those that are not. Indicate the original source
of a translation (if it is available, and not first published within
Wikipedia), and the original language (if that is not clear from the context).

If the original, untranslated text is available, provide a reference for it or
include it, as appropriate.

When editors themselves translate foreign text into English, care must always
be taken to include the original text, _in italics_ (except for non-Latin-
based writing systems), and to use actual and (if at all possible) common
English words in the translation. Unless you are certain of your competency to
translate something, see Wikipedia:Translation for assistance.

In the material below, the term _quotation_ includes conventional uses of
quotation marks such as for titles of songs, chapters, episodes, and so on.
Quotation marks are also used in other contexts, such as in cultivar names.

Most quotations take double quotation marks (Bob said: "Jim ate the
apple.").[g] Exceptions:

For a quotation within a quotation, use single quotes:

For deeper nesting, alternate single and double:

For quote marks in immediate succession, add a sliver of space by using `{{"
'}}`, `{{' "}}`, or (as in the example just given) `{{" ' "}}`:

Quotation marks should be used for the following names and titles:

For example: The song "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" from the album _Sgt.
Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band_ by the band the Beatles.

Do not use quotation marks or italics for:

Many, but not all, of the above items should also be in title case.

On the English Wikipedia, use the "logical quotation" style in all articles,
regardless of the variety of English in which they are written. Include
terminal punctuation within the quotation marks only if it was present in the
original material, and otherwise place it after the closing quotation mark.
For the most part, this means treating periods and commas in the same way as
question marks: keep them inside the quotation marks if they apply only to the
quoted material and outside if they apply to the whole sentence. Examples are
given below.

If the quotation is a single word or a sentence fragment, place the terminal
punctuation outside the closing quotation mark. When quoting a full sentence,
the end of which coincides with the end of the sentence containing it, place
terminal punctuation inside the closing quotation mark.

If the quoted sentence has been broken up with an editorial insertion, still
include the terminal punctuation inside the closing quotation mark.

If the quoted sentence is followed by a clause that should be preceded by a
comma, omit the full stop (period) – but other terminal punctuation, such as a
question mark or exclamation mark, may be retained.

If the quoted sentence is followed by a clause identifying the speaker, use a
comma outside the quotation mark instead of a full stop inside it, but retain
any other terminal punctuation, such as question marks.

Do not follow quoted words or fragments with commas inside the quotation
marks, except where a longer quotation has been broken up and the comma is
part of the full quotation.

This section applies to both round brackets ( ), often called parentheses, and
square brackets [ ].

If a sentence contains a bracketed phrase, place the sentence punctuation
outside the brackets (as shown here). However, where one or more sentences are
wholly inside brackets, place their punctuation inside the brackets. There
should be no space next to the inner side of a bracket. An opening bracket
should usually be preceded by a space. This may not be the case if it is
preceded by an opening quotation mark, another opening bracket, or a portion
of a word:

There should be a space after a closing bracket, except where a punctuation
mark follows (though a spaced dash would still be spaced after a closing
bracket) and in unusual cases similar to those listed for opening brackets.

If sets of brackets are nested, use different types for adjacent levels of
nesting; for two levels, it is customary to have square brackets appear within
round brackets. This is often a sign of excessively convoluted expressions; it
is often better to recast, linking the thoughts with commas, semicolons,
colons, or dashes.

Avoid adjacent sets of brackets. Either put the parenthetic phrases in one set
separated by commas, or rewrite:

Square brackets are used to indicate editorial replacements and insertions
within quotations, though this should never alter the intended meaning. They
serve three main purposes:

Square brackets inside of links must be escaped:

He said, "John [Doe] answered."

He said, "John [Doe] answered."

On the first day [etc.]

On the first day [etc.]

The `<nowiki>` markup can also be used: `<nowiki>[Doe]</nowiki>` or
`<nowiki>[etc.]</nowiki>`.

If a URL itself contains square brackets, the wiki-text should use the URL-
encoded form `https://example.com/foo.php?query=%5Bxxx%5Dyyy`, rather than
...`query=[xxx]yyy`. This will avoid truncation of the link after `xxx`.

Use an _ellipsis_ (plural _ellipses_ ) if material is omitted in the course of
a quotation, unless square brackets are used to gloss the quotation (see §
Brackets and parentheses, and the points below).

Always use a _pair_ of commas for this, unless another punctuation mark takes
the place of the second comma:

In geographical references that include multiple levels of subordinate
divisions (e.g., city, state/province, country), a comma separates each
element and follows the last element unless followed by other punctuation.
Dates in month–day–year format require a comma after the day, as well as after
the year, unless followed by other punctuation. In both cases, the last
element is treated as parenthetical.

A serial comma is a comma used immediately before a conjunction ( _and_ , _or_
, _nor_ ) in a list of three or more items: the phrase ham, chips, and eggs
includes a serial comma, while ham, chips and eggs omits it. Editors may use
either convention so long as each article is internally consistent; however,
there are cases in which either omitting or including the serial comma results
in ambiguity:

In such cases of ambiguity, clarify one of three ways:

A colon (:) introduces something which demonstrates, explains, or modifies
what has come before, or is a list of items that has just been introduced. The
items in such a list may be separated by commas; or, if they are more complex
and perhaps themselves contain commas, the items should be separated by
semicolons.

A colon may also be used to introduce direct speech enclosed within quotation
marks (see § Quotation marks).

In most cases a colon works best with a complete grammatical sentence before
it. There are exceptional cases, such as those where the colon introduces
items set off in new lines like the very next colon here. Examples:

Except in technical usage (a 3:1 ratio), no sentence should contain multiple
colons, no space precedes a colon, and a space (but never a hyphen or dash)
follows a colon.

A semicolon (;) is sometimes an alternative to a full stop (period), enabling
related material to be kept in the same sentence; it marks a more decisive
division in a sentence than a comma. If the semicolon separates clauses,
normally each clause must be independent (meaning that it could stand on its
own as a sentence). In many cases, only a comma or only a semicolon will be
correct in a given sentence.

Above, "Though he had been here before" cannot stand on its own as a sentence,
and therefore is not an independent clause.

This incorrect use of a comma between two independent clauses is known as a
comma splice; however, in certain kinds of cases a comma may be used where a
semicolon would seem to be called for:

A sentence may contain several semicolons, especially when the clauses are
parallel in construction and meaning; multiple unrelated semicolons are often
signs that the sentence should be divided into shorter sentences or otherwise
refashioned.

Semicolons are used in addition to commas to separate items in a listing, when
commas alone would result in confusion.

The meaning of a sentence containing a trailing clause that starts with the
word _however_ depends on the punctuation preceding that word. A common error
is to use the wrong punctuation, thereby changing the meaning to one not
intended.

When the word _however_ is an adverb meaning "nevertheless", it should be
preceded by a semicolon and followed by a comma. Example:

When the word _however_ is a conjunction meaning "in whatever manner", or
"regardless of how", it may be preceded by a comma but not by a semicolon, and
should not be followed by punctuation. Example:

In the first case, the clause that starts with "however" cannot be swapped
with the first clause; in the second case this can be done without change of
meaning:

If the two clauses cannot be swapped, a semicolon is required.

A sentence or clause can also contain the word _however_ in the middle, if it
is an adverb meaning "although" that could have been placed at the beginning
but does not start a new clause in mid-sentence. In this use, the word may be
enclosed between commas. Example:

Hyphens (-) indicate conjunction. There are three main uses:

**Multi-word hyphenated items:** It is often possible to avoid multi-word
hyphenated modifiers by rewording (a four-CD soundtrack album may be easier to
read as a soundtrack album of four CDs). This is particularly important where
converted units are involved (the 6-hectare-limit (14.8-acre-limit) rule might
be possible as the rule imposing a limit of 6 hectares (14.8 acres), and the
ungainly 4.9-mile (7.9 km) -long tributary as simply 4.9-mile (7.9 km)
tributary).

For optional hyphenation of compound **points of the compass** such as
_southwest/south-west_ , see § Compass points.

Do not use a capital letter after a hyphen except for a proper name: Graeco-
Roman and Mediterranean-style, but not Gandhi-Like. In titles of published
works, follow the capitalization rule for each part independently (resulting
in, e.g., _The Out-of-Towners_ ), unless reliable sources consistently do
otherwise in a particular case ( _The History of Middle-earth_ ).

Hyphenation rules in other languages may be different. Thus, in French a place
name such as Trois-Rivières ("Three Rivers") is hyphenated, when it would not
be in English. Follow reliable sources in such cases.

**Spacing:** A hyphen is never followed or preceded by a space, except when
hanging (see above) or when used to display parts of words independently, such
as the prefix sub- and the suffix -less.

**Image filenames and redirects:** Image filenames are not part of the
encyclopedic content; they are tools. They are most useful if they can be
readily typed, so they always use hyphens instead of dashes. Similarly,
article titles with dashes should also have a corresponding redirect from a
copy of the title with hyphens: for example, Michelson-Morley experiment
redirects to Michelson–Morley experiment.

**Non-breaking:** A non-breaking hyphen (`&#8209;` or `{{nbhyph}}`) will _not_
be used as a point of line-wrap.

**Soft hyphens:** Use soft hyphens to mark locations where a word will be
broken and hyphenated _if necessary_ at the end of a line of text, usually in
very long words or narrow spaces (such as captions, narrow table columns, or
text adjacent to a very wide image), for example: `{{shy| Penn|syl|va|nia and
Mass|a|chu|setts style themselves com|mon|wealths.}}`. Use sparingly to avoid
making wikitext difficult to read and edit. For more information, see
Help:Line-break handling.

**Encoding** : The hyphen is represented by the ASCII/UNICODE HYPHEN-MINUS
character, which is entered by the hyphen or minus key on all standard
computer keyboards. Do not use the UNICODE HYPHEN character.

Hyphenation involves many subtleties that cannot be covered here; the rules
and examples presented above illustrate the broad principles.

Two forms of dash are used on Wikipedia: **en dash** (–) and **em dash** (—).
To enter them, click on them in the CharInsert toolbar to the right of the
"Insert" dropdown beneath the edit window (in the Monobook Skin), or enter
them manually as `&ndash;` or `&mdash;`, respectively. Do not use a double
hyphen (`--`) to stand in for a dash. (See also: Wikipedia:How to make
dashes.)

Sources use dashes in varying ways. For consistency and clarity, Wikipedia
adopts the following principles.

In article titles, do not use a hyphen (-) as a substitute for an en dash, for
example in _eye–hand span_ (since _eye_ does not modify _hand_ ). Nonetheless,
to aid searching and linking, provide a redirect with hyphens replacing the en
dash(es), as in _eye-hand span_. Similarly, provide category redirects for
categories containing dashes.

Dashes are often used to mark divisions within a sentence: in pairs
(parenthetical dashes, instead of parentheses or pairs of commas); or singly
(perhaps instead of a colon). They may also indicate an abrupt stop or
interruption, in reporting quoted speech. In all these cases, use either
unspaced em dashes or spaced en dashes, with consistency in any one article:

Ideally, use a non-breaking space before the en dash, which prevents the en
dash from occurring at the beginning of a line (markup: the `{{spaced ndash}}`
or `{{snd}}` templates, or use the HTML character entity `&nbsp;`):

But do not insert a non-breaking or other space where the en dash should be
unspaced (see § Other uses (en dash only)).

Dashes can clarify the sentence structure when there are already commas or
parentheses, or both.

Use dashes sparingly. More than two in a single sentence makes the structure
unclear; it takes time for the reader to see which dashes, if any, form a
pair.

The en dash (–) has other roles, beyond its use as a sentence-punctuating dash
(see immediately above). It is often analogous to the hyphen (see § Hyphens),
which _joins components_ more strongly than the en dash; or to the slash (see
§ Slashes), which _separates alternatives_ more definitely. Consider the exact
meaning when choosing which to use.

An indented em dash may be used before a name or other source when attributing
below a block quotation, poem, etc. This dash should not be fully spaced,
though it is best for metadata and accessibility reasons to hair-space it from
the name with the HTML character code &#8202;.[j] Most of Wikipedia's
quotation templates with attribution-related parameters already provide this
formatting.

For example, {{in5}}—&#8202;Charlotte Brontë will produce:

— Charlotte Brontë

Do not change hyphens to dashes in filenames, URLs, or templates like
`{{Bibleverse}}` (which formats verse ranges into URLs).

Do not mix en dashes with _between_ or _from_.

If negative values are involved, an en dash might be confusing. Use words
instead.

The en dash in a range is always unspaced, except when either or both elements
of the range include at least one space.

Here, the relationship is thought of as parallel, symmetric, equal,
oppositional, or at least involving _separate or independent elements_. The
components may be nouns, adjectives, verbs, or any other independent part of
speech. Often if the components are reversed there would be little change of
meaning.

Generally, use a hyphen in compounded proper names of single entities.

An en dash between separate nations; for people and things identifying with
multiple nationalities, use a hyphen when applied as an adjective or a space
as a noun.

A slash or some other alternative may occasionally be better to express a
ratio, especially in technical contexts (see § Slashes).

Use an en dash for the names of two or more entities in an attributive
compound.

Do not use an en dash for hyphenated personal names, even when they are used
as adjectives:

Do not use spaces around en dash in any of the compounds above.

Use this punctuation when there are compelling grounds for retaining the
construction. For example, from a speech that is simply transcribed and cannot
be re-worded; or in a heading where it has been judged most natural as a
common name; or for conciseness in a caption or table entry. Otherwise
recasting is better.

The en dash in all of the compounds above is unspaced.

Spaced en dashes are sometimes used between parts of list items. For example:

or

Do not use typewriter approximations or other substitutes, such as two hyphens
(\--), for em or en dashes.

For a negative sign or subtraction operator use U+2212 − MINUS SIGN (HTML
`&#8722;` **·** `&minus;`), which can also be generated by clicking on the `−`
following the `±` in the Insert toolbar beneath the edit window.

Generally, avoid joining two words with a slash, also called a forward slash
or _solidus_ ( / ), because it suggests that the words are related without
specifying how. Replace with clearer wording.

An example: The parent/instructor must be present at all times. Must both be
present? (Then write the parent and the instructor.) Must at least one be
present? (Then write the parent or the instructor.) Are they the same person?
(Use a hyphen: the parent-instructor.)

In circumstances involving a distinction or disjunction, the en dash (see
above) is usually preferable to the slash: the digital–analog distinction.

An unspaced slash may be used:

A spaced slash may be used:

To avoid awkward linebreaks, code spaced slashes (and fraction slashes) with a
non-breaking space on the left and a normal space on the right, as in: `My
mama told me&nbsp;/ You better shop around`. For short constructions, both
spaces should be non-breaking: `x&nbsp;/&nbsp;y`.

Do not use the backslash character ( \ ) in place of a slash.

Prefer the division operator ( ÷ ) to slash or fraction slash when
representing elementary arithmetic in general text: 10 ÷ 2 = 5. In more
advanced mathematical formulas, a vinculum or slash is preferred:  x n n !
{\displaystyle \textstyle {\frac {x^{n}}{n!}}} ![\\textstyle {\\frac
{x^{n}}{n!}}](https://wikimedia.org/api/rest_v1/media/math/render/svg/ee718eb4c7398dd2f8bd809decb7b8576a03529a)
or xn/n!. (See WP:Manual of Style/Dates and numbers § Common mathematical
symbols and Help:Displaying a formula.)

Avoid writing and/or unless other constructions would be lengthy and also, or
alternatively, would be awkward. Instead of Most had trauma and/or smoke
inhalation, write simply trauma or smoke inhalation (which would normally be
interpreted to imply _or both_ ); or, for emphasis or precision or both, write
trauma or smoke inhalation or both. Where more than two possibilities are
present, instead of x, y, and/or z write one or more of x, y, and z or some or
all of x, y, and z.

Avoid using the # symbol (known as the number sign, hash sign, or pound sign)
when referring to numbers or rankings. Instead write "number", "No." or
"Nos."; do not use the symbol №. For example:

An exception is issue numbers of comic books, which unlike for other
periodicals are given in general text in the form #1, unless a volume is also
given, in which case write volume two, number seven or Vol. 2, No. 7. When
using the abbreviations, write `{{abbr|Vol.|Volume}}`, `{{abbr|No.|Number}}`,
or `{{abbr|Nos.|Numbers}}`.

In normal text, never put a space before a comma, semicolon, colon,
period/full stop, question mark, or exclamation mark (even in quoted material;
see § Typographic conformity).

Some editors type two spaces after a period/full stop; these are condensed to
one when the page is rendered, so what the reader sees is not affected – see
Sentence spacing.

Where a word or phrase that includes terminal punctuation ends a sentence, do
not add a second terminal punctuation mark. If a quoted phrase or title ends
in a question mark or exclamation mark, it may confuse readers as to the
nature of the article sentence containing it, and so is usually better
reworded to be mid-sentence. Where such a word or phrase occurs mid-sentence,
new terminal punctuation (usually a period) must be added at the end.

**Ref tags** (`<ref>...</ref>`) are used to create _footnotes_ (sometimes
called _endnotes_ or _notes_ ). The ref tags should immediately follow the
text to which the footnote applies, with no intervening space (except possibly
a hair space, generated by {{hsp}}). Any punctuation (see exceptions below)
must precede the ref tags. Adjacent ref tags should have no space between
them. This applies to all ref tags, including both explanatory notes and
citation footnotes.

When ref tags are used, a footnote list must be added, and is usually placed
in the Notes and References section near the end of the article in the
standard appendices and footers.

Exceptions: Ref tags are placed _before_ dashes, not after. Where a footnote
applies only to material within parentheses, the ref tags belong just before
the closing parenthesis.

A sentence that ends with a formula should have terminal punctuation (period,
exclamation mark, or question mark) after the formula. Within a sentence,
place other punctuation (such as commas or colons) after the formula just as
if the text were not a formula. See WP:Manual of Style/Mathematics §
Punctuation after formulae.

For ranges of dates and times, see § En dashes: other uses.

Dates should only be linked when they are germane and topical to the subject,
as discussed at WP:Manual of Style/Linking § Chronological items.

Time of day is normally expressed in figures rather than being spelled out.
Use context to determine whether to use the 12- or 24-hour.

Full dates are formatted 10 June 1921 or June 10, 1921; or where the year is
omitted, use 10 June or June 10.

More information on all of the above topics can be found at WP:Manual of
Style/Dates and numbers § Dates, including the handling of dates expressed in
different calendars, and times corresponding to different time zones.

The term "current" should be avoided. What is current today may not be
tomorrow; situations change over time. Instead, use date- and time-specific
text. To help keep information updated use the `{{as of}}` template.

To maintain an objective and impersonal encyclopedic voice, an article should
never refer to its editors or readers using _I_ , _my_ , _we_ , _us_ , or
similar forms: We should note that some critics have argued against our
proposal. But some such forms are acceptable in certain figurative uses. For
example:

Avoid addressing the reader using _you_ or _your_ , which sets an
inappropriate tone (see also § Instructional and presumptuous language).

Use the appropriate plural; allow for cases (such as _excursus_ or _hanif_ )
in which a word is now listed in major English dictionaries, and normally
takes an _s_ or _es_ plural, not its original plural: two excursuses, not two
__excursus__ as in Latin; two hanifs, not two _hanufa_ as in Arabic.

Some collective nouns – such as _team_ (and proper names of them), _army_ ,
_company_ , _crowd_ , _fleet_ , _government_ , _majority_ , _mess_ , _number_
, _pack_ , and _party_ – may refer either to a single entity or to the members
that compose it. In British English, such words are sometimes treated as
singular, but more often treated as plural, according to context.
Exceptionally, names of towns and countries usually take singular verbs
(unless they are being used to refer to a team or company by that name, or
when discussing actions of that entity's government). For example, in England
are playing Germany tonight, _England_ refers to a football team; but in
England is the most populous country of the United Kingdom, it refers to the
country. In North American English, these words (and _the United States_ , for
historical reasons) are almost invariably treated as singular; the major
exception is when sports teams are referred to by nicknames, plural verbs are
commonly used to match e.g. the Heat are playing the Lakers. See also §
National varieties of English.

By default, write articles in the present tense, including those covering
products or works that have been discontinued. Articles discussing works of
fiction are also written in the present tense (see Wikipedia:Writing better
articles § Tense in fiction). Generally, do not use past tense except for dead
subjects, past events, and subjects that no longer meaningfully exist as such.

Tense can be used to distinguish between current and former status of a
subject: Dún Aonghasa _is_ the ruin of a prehistoric Irish cliff fort. Its
original shape _was_ presumably oval or D-shaped, but parts of the cliff and
fort have since collapsed into the sea. (Emphasis added for clarity.)

Avoid contractions, which have little place in formal writing. For example,
write _cannot_ instead of _can't_.

Use gender-neutral language – avoiding the generic _he_ and generic _she_, for
example – where this can be done with clarity and precision. This does not
apply to direct quotations or the titles of works ( _The Ascent of Man_ ),
which should not be altered, or to wording about one-gender contexts, such as
an all-female school (When any student breaks that rule, she loses
privileges).

Ships may be referred to using either feminine forms ("she", "her", "hers") or
neuter forms ("it", "its"). Either usage is acceptable, but each article
should be internally consistent and employ one or the other exclusively. As
with all optional styles, articles should not be changed from one style to
another unless there is a substantial reason to do so. See WP:Manual of
Style/Military history § Pronouns.

Avoid words and phrases that give the impression of straining for formality,
that are unnecessarily regional, or that are not widely accepted. See List of
English words with disputed usage and Wikipedia:List of commonly misused
English words; see also § Identity.

Avoid such phrases as remember that and note that, which address readers
directly in an unencyclopedic tone and lean toward instructional. They are a
subtle form of Wikipedia self-reference, "breaking the fourth wall".
Similarly, phrases such as of course, naturally, obviously, clearly, and
actually make presumptions about readers' knowledge, may express a viewpoint,
and may call into question the reason for including the information in the
first place. Do not _tell_ readers that something is ironic, surprising,
unexpected, amusing, coincidental, etc. Simply state the sourced facts and
allow readers to draw their own conclusions. Such constructions can usually
just be deleted, leaving behind proper sentences with a more academic and less
pushy tone: Note that this was naturally subject to controversy in more
conservative newspapers. becomes This was subject to controversy in more
conservative newspapers.

Avoid rhetorical questions, especially in headings. Use a heading of Active
listening and text such as The term _active listening_ , coined in ..., not
What is _active listening_?.

A neutral cross-reference is permissible – e.g., (see also Bulverism) – but is
usually better recast as a sentence with a link – Bulverism, also known as the
psychogenetic fallacy, is a related logic flaw.

A _subset term_ identifies a set of members of a larger class. Common subset
terms are _including_ , _among_ , and _et cetera_ ( _etc._ ). Avoid redundant
subset terms (e.g., mis-constructions like: **Among** the most well-known
members of the fraternity are **included** two members of the Onassis family;
or The elements in stars **include** hydrogen, helium, **etc.** ). The word
_including_ does not introduce a complete list; instead, use _comprising_ ,
_consisting of_ , or _composed of_.

When there is a discrepancy between the term most commonly used by reliable
sources for a person or group and the term that person or group uses for
themselves, use the term that is most commonly used by reliable sources. If it
isn't clear which is most used, use the term that the person or group uses.

Disputes over how to refer to a person or group are addressed by Wikipedia
content policies, such as those on verifiability, and neutral point of view
(and article titles when the term appears in the title of an article).

Use specific terminology. For example, it is often more appropriate for people
or things from Ethiopia (a country in Africa) to be described as _Ethiopian_ ,
not carelessly (with the risk of stereotyping) as _African_.

Foreign words should be used sparingly.

Where possible, non-English should be marked up using the appropriate ISO
language code, e.g. `{{lang|es|casa}}`. There are alternatives to the
`{{lang}}` template which also provide additional information about a foreign
word or phrase, such as a link to the language name; see Category:Wikipedia
multilingual support templates.

Use italics for phrases in other languages and for isolated foreign words that
are not current in English. See WP:Manual of Style/Text formatting § Foreign
terms for details. The `{{lang}}` template and related templates automatically
italicize text, so do not add separate italics markup around or within them.

Loanwords and borrowed phrases that have common usage in English – Gestapo,
samurai, vice versa – do not require italics. A rule of thumb is to not
italicize words that appear unitalicized in general-purpose English-language
dictionaries.

Names not originally written in one of the Latin-script alphabets (written for
example in Greek, Cyrillic, or Chinese scripts) must be given a romanized form
for use in English. Use a systematically transliterated or otherwise romanized
name (Aleksandr Tymoczko, Wang Yanhong); but if there is a common English form
of the name (Tchaikovsky, Chiang Kai-shek), use that form instead.

The use of diacritics (such as accent marks) for foreign words is neither
encouraged nor discouraged; their usage depends on whether they appear in
verifiable reliable sources in English and on the constraints imposed by
specialized Wikipedia guidelines (see also WP:Manual of Style/Proper names §
Diacritics). Provide redirects from alternative forms that use or exclude
diacritics.

Spell a name consistently in the title and the text of an article. See
relevant policy at WP:Article titles; see also WP:Naming conventions (use
English). For foreign names, phrases, and words generally, adopt the spellings
most commonly used in English-language references for the article, unless
those spellings are idiosyncratic or obsolete. If a foreign term does not
appear in the article's references, adopt the spelling most commonly used in
other verifiable reliable sources (for example other English-language
dictionaries and encyclopedias). For punctuation of compounded forms, see
relevant guidelines in § Punctuation.

Sometimes the usage will be influenced by other guidelines, such as § National
varieties of English, which may lead to different choices in different
articles.

Some topics are intrinsically technical, but editors should try to make them
understandable to as many readers as possible. Minimize jargon, or at least
explain it or tag it using `{{Technical}}` or `{{Technical-statement}}` for
other editors to fix. For unavoidably technical articles, a separate
introductory article (like Introduction to general relativity) may be the best
solution. Avoid excessive _wikilinking_ (linking within Wikipedia) as a
substitute for parenthetic explanations such as the one in this sentence. Do
not introduce new and specialized words simply to teach them to the reader
when more common alternatives will do. When the notions named by jargon are
too complex to explain concisely in a few parenthetical words, write one level
down. For example, consider adding a brief background section with `{{main}}`
tags pointing to the full treatment article(s) of the prerequisite notions;
this approach is practical only when the prerequisite concepts are central to
the exposition of the article's main topic and when such prerequisites are not
too numerous. Short articles like stubs generally do not have such sections.

Places should generally be referred to consistently by the same name as in the
title of their article (see Wikipedia:Naming conventions (geographic names)).
Exceptions are made if there is a widely accepted historical English name
appropriate to the given context. In cases where such a historical name is
used, it should be followed by the modern name in round brackets (parentheses)
on the first occurrence of the name in applicable sections of the article.
This resembles linking; it should not be done to the detriment of style. On
the other hand, it is probably better to provide such a variant too often than
too rarely. If more than one historical name is applicable for a given
context, the other names should be added after the modern English name, that
is: "historical name (modern name, other historical names)".

Other media files include video and audio files. Style recommendations for
such files largely follow recommendations for image files (as far as
applicable).

Textual information should almost always be entered as text rather than as an
image. True text can be colored and adjusted with CSS tags and templates, but
text in images cannot be. Images are not searchable, are slower to download,
and are unlikely to be read as text by devices for the visually impaired. Any
important textual information in an image should also appear in the image's
alt text, caption, or other nearby text.

For entering textual information as audio, see Wikipedia:WikiProject Spoken
Wikipedia.

Photographs and other graphics should have captions, unless they are
unambiguous depictions of the subject of the article or when they are "self-
captioning" images (such as reproductions of album or book covers). In a
biography article no caption is necessary for a portrait of the subject
pictured alone, but one might be used to give the year, the subject's age, or
other circumstances of the portrait along with the name of the subject.

**Makelinks only where they are relevant and helpful in the context**:
Excessive use of hyperlinks can be distracting and may slow the reader down.
Redundant links (like the one in the tallest people on Earth) clutter the page
and make future maintenance harder. High-value links that _are_ worth pursuing
should stand out clearly.

**Linking to sections** : A hash sign (`#`) followed by the appropriate
heading will lead to a relevant part of a page. For example, `[[Apostrophe#Use
in non-English names]]` links to a particular section of the article
Apostrophe.

**Initial capitalization** : Wikipedia's MediaWiki software does not require
that wikilinks begin with an upper-case character. Only capitalize the first
letter where this is naturally called for, or when specifically referring to
the linked article by its name: Snakes are often venomous, but lizards only
rarely (see Poison).

**Check links** : Ensure that the destination is the intended one; many
dictionary words lead to disambiguation pages and not to complete or well-
chosen articles.

External links should not normally be used in the body of an article. Instead,
articles can include an _External links_ section at the end, pointing to
further information outside Wikipedia as distinct from citing sources. The
standard format is a primary heading, `==External links==`, followed by a
bulleted list of links. Identify the link and briefly indicate its relevance
to the article. For example:

These will appear as:

Where appropriate, use external link templates such as `{{Official website}}`
and `{{URL}}`.

Add external links with discretion; Wikipedia is not a link repository.

Other things being equal, keep markup simple. This makes wikitext easier to
understand and edit, and the results seen by the reader more predictable. Use
HTML and CSS markup sparingly.

In general, wikitext formatting is considered easier to use than HTML and
wikitext is preferred if there are equivalents; see Help:HTML in wikitext.
Obsolete elements and attributes should be updated or removed. There are many
templates that allow HTML markup to be used without putting it in articles
directly, such as {{em}} (see MOS:EMPHASIS) and {{strong}} (see MOS:BOLD).

An HTML character entity is sometimes better than the equivalent Unicode
character, which may be difficult to identify in edit mode; for example,
`&Alpha;` is explicit whereas `Α` (the upper-case form of Greek `α`) may be
misidentified as the Latin `A`.

Modifications in font size, blank space, and color (see § Color coding) are an
issue for the Wikipedia site-wide style sheet, and should be reserved for
special cases only.

Typically, the use of custom font styles will:

Outside article text, different font sizes are routinely used in navigation
templates and infoboxes, tables (especially in larger ones), and some other
contexts where alternatives are not available (such as table captions).
Specify font sizes _relatively_ (for example with `font-size: 85%`) rather
than _absolutely_ (like `font-size: 8pt`).

Do not use color _alone_ to mark differences in text: they may be invisible to
people with color blindness and useless in black-and-white printouts or
displays.

Choose colors that are distinguishable by readers with the commonest form of
colorblindness, such as maroon and teal; and _additionally_ mark the
differences with change of font or some other means (maroon and alternative
font face, teal). Avoid low contrast between text and background colors.
Viewing the page with Toptal can help with the choice of colors. See also
color coding.

Even for readers with unimpaired color vision, excessive background shading of
table entries impedes readability and recognition of Wikilinks. Background
color should be used only as a _supplementary_ visual cue, and should be
subtle (consider using lighter, less-dominant pastel hues) rather than
glaring.

Do not abuse block quotation markup to indent non-quotations. Various
templates are available for indentation, including `{{block indent}}`, and
(for inline use) `{{in5}}`.

Avoid `:` (description list markup) for simple visual indentation in articles
(common as it may be on talk pages). It causes accessibility problems and
outputs invalid HTML. See WP:Manual of Style/Accessibility § Indentation for
alternatives.

Scrolling lists, and collapsible templates that toggle text display between
_hide_ and _show_ , can interfere with readers' ability to access our content.
Such mechanisms are not to be used to conceal "spoiler" information. Templates
are not normally used to store article text at all, as it interferes with
editors' ability to find and edit it.

When such features are used, take care that the content will still be
accessible on devices that do not support JavaScript or CSS, and to the 45%
(and climbing) of Wikipedia readers who use the mobile version of the site,[m]
which has a limited set of features. Mobile ability to access the content in
question is easy to test with the "Mobile view" link at the bottom of each
page.[n]

**Collapsible templates should not conceal article content by default upon
page loading.** This includes reference lists, tables and lists of article
content, image galleries, and image captions. In particular, while some
templates support a `collapsible` parameter or manually-added CSS class, and
this is permissible, the `collapsed`, `mw-collapsed`, and `autocollapse`
states _should not be used in articles_ to pre-emptively force the closure of
these elements, except as noted below. Any information hidden in this way when
the page loads will be irreversibly invisible to the aforementioned classes of
users, as well as a growing number of low-bandwidth users in Asia who reach a
Wikipedia article via Google.[o] Several other CSS classes, used manually or
by templates, will render content inaccessible to mobile users.[p]

Collapsed or auto-collapsing _cells_ or _sections_ may be used with tables if
it simply repeats information covered in the main text (or is purely
supplementary, e.g. several past years of statistics in collapsed tables for
comparison with a table of uncollapsed current stats). Auto-collapsing is
often a feature of navboxes. A few infoboxes also use pre-collapsed sections
for infrequently accessed details. If information in a list, infobox, or other
non-navigational content seems extraneous or trivial enough to inspire pre-
collapsing it, consider raising a discussion on the article (or template) talk
page about whether it should be included at all. If the information is
important and the concern is article density or length, consider dividing the
article into more sections, integrating unnecessarily list-formatted
information into the article prose, or splitting the article.

Editors use "invisible" comments – not shown in the rendered page seen by
readers of the article, but visible in the wiki source when an editor opens
the article for editing – to communicate with one another.

Invisible comments are useful for alerting other editors to issues such as
common mistakes that regularly occur in the article, a section title being the
target of an incoming link, or pointing to a discussion that established a
consensus relating to the article. They should not be used to instruct other
editors not to perform certain edits, although where existing consensus is
against making such an edit, they may usefully draw the editor's attention to
that. Avoid adding too many invisible comments because they can clutter the
wiki source for other editors. Check that your invisible comment does not
change the formatting, for example by introducing unwanted white space in the
rendered page.

To leave an invisible comment, enclose the text you intend to be read only by
editors between `<!--` and `-->`. For example:

This notation can be inserted with a single click in wiki markup, just under
the edit pane in edit mode.

**Pronunciation** in Wikipedia is indicated in the International Phonetic
Alphabet (IPA). In most situations, for ease of understanding by the majority
of readers and across variants of the language, quite broad IPA transcriptions
are best for English pronunciations. See Help:IPA/English and Help:IPA
(general) for keys, and `{{IPA}}` for templates that link to these keys. For
English pronunciations, pronunciation respellings may be used _in addition to_
the IPA.

(Links to policy and guidelines on specific questions)

Wikipedians are encouraged to familiarize themselves with modern editions of
other guides to style and usage, which may cover details not included here.
Those that have most influenced the Wikipedia Manual of Style are:

For additional reference works, see notable entries at style guide and
Dictionary § Major English dictionaries.

  *[WHO]: World Health Organization
  *[Vol.]: Volume
  *[No.]: Number

