You are free:

for any purpose, even commercially.

Under the following conditions:

With the understanding that:

THE WORK (AS DEFINED BELOW) IS PROVIDED UNDER THE TERMS OF THIS CREATIVE
COMMONS PUBLIC LICENSE ("CCPL" OR "LICENSE"). THE WORK IS PROTECTED BY
COPYRIGHT AND/OR OTHER APPLICABLE LAW. ANY USE OF THE WORK OTHER THAN AS
AUTHORIZED UNDER THIS LICENSE OR COPYRIGHT LAW IS PROHIBITED.

BY EXERCISING ANY RIGHTS TO THE WORK PROVIDED HERE, YOU ACCEPT AND AGREE TO BE
BOUND BY THE TERMS OF THIS LICENSE. TO THE EXTENT THIS LICENSE MAY BE
CONSIDERED TO BE A CONTRACT, THE LICENSOR GRANTS YOU THE RIGHTS CONTAINED HERE
IN CONSIDERATION OF YOUR ACCEPTANCE OF SUCH TERMS AND CONDITIONS.

Nothing in this License is intended to reduce, limit, or restrict any uses
free from copyright or rights arising from limitations or exceptions that are
provided for in connection with the copyright protection under copyright law
or other applicable laws.

Subject to the terms and conditions of this License, Licensor hereby grants
You a worldwide, royalty-free, non-exclusive, perpetual (for the duration of
the applicable copyright) license to exercise the rights in the Work as stated
below:

The above rights may be exercised in all media and formats whether now known
or hereafter devised. The above rights include the right to make such
modifications as are technically necessary to exercise the rights in other
media and formats. Subject to Section 8(f), all rights not expressly granted
by Licensor are hereby reserved.

The license granted in Section 3 above is expressly made subject to and
limited by the following restrictions:

UNLESS OTHERWISE MUTUALLY AGREED TO BY THE PARTIES IN WRITING, LICENSOR OFFERS
THE WORK AS-IS AND MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND
CONCERNING THE WORK, EXPRESS, IMPLIED, STATUTORY OR OTHERWISE, INCLUDING,
WITHOUT LIMITATION, WARRANTIES OF TITLE, MERCHANTIBILITY, FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NONINFRINGEMENT, OR THE ABSENCE OF LATENT OR OTHER
DEFECTS, ACCURACY, OR THE PRESENCE OF ABSENCE OF ERRORS, WHETHER OR NOT
DISCOVERABLE. SOME JURISDICTIONS DO NOT ALLOW THE EXCLUSION OF IMPLIED
WARRANTIES, SO SUCH EXCLUSION MAY NOT APPLY TO YOU.

EXCEPT TO THE EXTENT REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW, IN NO EVENT WILL LICENSOR BE
LIABLE TO YOU ON ANY LEGAL THEORY FOR ANY SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR EXEMPLARY DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THIS LICENSE OR THE USE OF THE
WORK, EVEN IF LICENSOR HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

Creative Commons is not a party to this License, and makes no warranty
whatsoever in connection with the Work. Creative Commons will not be liable to
You or any party on any legal theory for any damages whatsoever, including
without limitation any general, special, incidental or consequential damages
arising in connection to this license. Notwithstanding the foregoing two (2)
sentences, if Creative Commons has expressly identified itself as the Licensor
hereunder, it shall have all rights and obligations of Licensor.

Except for the limited purpose of indicating to the public that the Work is
licensed under the CCPL, Creative Commons does not authorize the use by either
party of the trademark "Creative Commons" or any related trademark or logo of
Creative Commons without the prior written consent of Creative Commons. Any
permitted use will be in compliance with Creative Commons' then-current
trademark usage guidelines, as may be published on its website or otherwise
made available upon request from time to time. For the avoidance of doubt,
this trademark restriction does not form part of the License.

