In computational science, **wildfire modeling** is concerned with numerical
simulation of wildland fires in order to understand and predict fire behavior.
Wildfire modeling can ultimately aid wildland fire suppression, namely
increase safety of firefighters and the public, reduce risk, and minimize
damage. Wildfire modeling can also aid in protecting ecosystems, watersheds,
and air quality.

Wildfire modeling attempts to reproduce fire behavior, such as how quickly the
fire spreads, in which direction, how much heat it generates. A key input to
behavior modeling is the Fuel Model, or type of fuel, through which the fire
is burning. Behavior modeling can also include whether the fire transitions
from the surface (a "surface fire") to the tree crowns (a "crown fire"), as
well as extreme fire behavior including rapid rates of spread, fire whirls,
and tall well-developed convection columns. Fire modeling also attempts to
estimate fire effects, such as the ecological and hydrological effects of the
fire, fuel consumption, tree mortality, and amount and rate of smoke produced.

Wildland fire behavior is affected by weather, fuel characteristics, and
topography.

Weather influences fire through wind and moisture. Wind increases the fire
spread in the wind direction, higher temperature makes the fire burn faster,
while higher relative humidity, and precipitation (rain or snow) may slow it
down or extinguish it altogether. Weather involving fast wind changes can be
particularly dangerous, since they can suddenly change the fire direction and
behavior. Such weather includes cold fronts, foehn winds, thunderstorm
downdrafts, sea and land breeze, and diurnal slope winds.

Wildfire fuel includes grass, wood, and anything else that can burn. Small dry
twigs burn faster while large logs burn slower; dry fuel ignites more easily
and burns faster than wet fuel.

Topography factors that influence wildfires include the orientation toward the
sun, which influences the amount of energy received from the sun, and the
slope (fire spreads faster uphill). Fire can accelerate in narrow canyons and
it can be slowed down or stopped by barriers such as creeks and roads.

These factors act in combination. Rain or snow increases the fuel moisture,
high relative humidity slows the drying of the fuel, while winds can make fuel
dry faster. Wind can change the fire-accelerating effect of slopes to effects
such as downslope windstorms (called Santa Anas, foehn winds, East winds,
depending on the geographic location). Fuel properties may vary with
topography as plant density varies with elevation or aspect with respect to
the sun.

It has long been recognized that "fires create their own weather." That is,
the heat and moisture created by the fire feed back into the atmosphere,
creating intense winds that drive the fire behavior. The heat produced by the
wildfire changes the temperature of the atmosphere and creates strong
updrafts, which can change the direction of surface winds. The water vapor
released by the fire changes the moisture balance of the atmosphere. The water
vapor can be carried away, where the latent heat stored in the vapor is
released through condensation.

Like all models in computational science, fire models need to strike a balance
between fidelity, availability of data, and fast execution. Wildland fire
models span a vast range of complexity, from simple cause and effect
principles to the most physically complex presenting a difficult
supercomputing challenge that cannot hope to be solved faster than real time.

Forest-fire models have been developed since 1940 to the present, but a lot of
chemical and thermodynamic questions related to fire behaviour are still to be
resolved. Scientists and their forest fire models from 1940 till 2003 are
listed in article.[1] Models can be divided into three groups: Empirical,
Semi-empirical, and Physically based.

Conceptual models from experience and intuition from past fires can be used to
anticipate the future. Many semi-empirical fire spread equations, as in those
published by the USDA Forest Service,[2] Forestry Canada,[3] Nobel, Bary, and
Gill,[4] and Cheney, Gould, and Catchpole[5] for Australasian fuel complexes
have been developed for quick estimation of fundamental parameters of interest
such as fire spread rate, flame length, and fireline intensity of surface
fires at a point for specific fuel complexes, assuming a representative point-
location wind and terrain slope. Based on the work by Fons's in 1946,[6] and
Emmons in 1963,[7] the quasi-steady equilibrium spread rate calculated for a
surface fire on flat ground in no-wind conditions was calibrated using data of
piles of sticks burned in a flame chamber/wind tunnel to represent other wind
and slope conditions for the fuel complexes tested.

Two-dimensional fire growth models such as FARSITE[8] and Prometheus,[9] the
Canadian wildland fire growth model designed to work in Canadian fuel
complexes, have been developed that apply such semi-empirical relationships
and others regarding ground-to-crown transitions to calculate fire spread and
other parameters along the surface. Certain assumptions must be made in models
such as FARSITE and Prometheus to shape the fire growth. For example,
Prometheus and FARSITE use the Huygens principle of wave propagation. A set of
equations that can be used to propagate (shape and direction) a fire front
using an elliptical shape was developed by Richards in 1990.[10] Although more
sophisticated applications use a three-dimensional numerical weather
prediction system to provide inputs such as wind velocity to one of the fire
growth models listed above, the input was passive and the feedback of the fire
upon the atmospheric wind and humidity are not accounted for.

A simplified physically based two-dimensional fire spread models based upon
conservation laws that use radiation as the dominant heat transfer mechanism
and convection, which represents the effect of wind and slope, lead to
reactionâ€“diffusion systems of partial differential equations.[11][12]

More complex physical models join computational fluid dynamics models with a
wildland fire component and allow the fire to feed back upon the atmosphere.
These models include NCAR's Coupled Atmosphere-Wildland Fire-Environment
(CAWFE) model developed in 2005,[13] WRF-Fire at NCAR and University of
Colorado Denver[14] which combines the Weather Research and Forecasting Model
with a spread model by the level-set method, University of Utah's Coupled
Atmosphere-Wildland Fire Large Eddy Simulation developed in 2009,[15] Los
Alamos National Laboratory's FIRETEC developed in,[16] the WUI (Wildland Urban
Interface) Fire Dynamics Simulator (WFDS) developed in 2007,[17] and, to some
degree, the two-dimensional model FIRESTAR.[18][19][20] These tools have
different emphases and have been applied to better understand the fundamental
aspects of fire behavior, such as fuel inhomogeneities on fire behavior,[16]
feedbacks between the fire and the atmospheric environment as the basis for
the universal fire shape,[21][22] and are beginning to be applied to wildland
urban interface house-to-house fire spread at the community-scale.

The cost of added physical complexity is a corresponding increase in
computational cost, so much so that a full three-dimensional explicit
treatment of combustion in wildland fuels by direct numerical simulation (DNS)
at scales relevant for atmospheric modeling does not exist, is beyond current
supercomputers, and does not currently make sense to do because of the limited
skill of weather models at spatial resolution under 1 km. Consequently, even
these more complex models parameterize the fire in some way, for example,
papers by Clark[23][24] use equations developed by Rothermel for the USDA
forest service[2] to calculate local fire spread rates using fire-modified
local winds. And, although FIRETEC and WFDS carry prognostic conservation
equations for the reacting fuel and oxygen concentrations, the computational
grid cannot be fine enough to resolve the reaction rate-limiting mixing of
fuel and oxygen, so approximations must be made concerning the subgrid-scale
temperature distribution or the combustion reaction rates themselves. These
models also are too small-scale to interact with a weather model, so the fluid
motions use a computational fluid dynamics model confined in a box much
smaller than the typical wildfire.

Attempts to create the most complete theoretical model were made by Albini
F.A. in USA and Grishin A.M.[25] in Russia. Grishin's work is based on the
fundamental laws of physics, conservation and theoretical justifications are
provided. The simplified two-dimensional model of running crown forest fire
was developed in Belarusian State University by Barovik D.V.[26] and Taranchuk
V.B.

Data assimilation periodically adjusts the model state to incorporate new data
using statistical methods. Because fire is highly nonlinear and irreversible,
data assimilation for fire models poses special challenges, and standard
methods, such as the ensemble Kalman filter (EnKF) do not work well.
Statistical variability of corrections and especially large corrections may
result in nonphysical states, which tend to be preceded or accompanied by
large spatial gradients. In order to ease this problem, the regularized
EnKF[27] penalizes large changes of spatial gradients in the Bayesian update
in EnKF. The regularization technique has a stabilizing effect on the
simulations in the ensemble but it does not improve much the ability of the
EnKF to track the data: The posterior ensemble is made out of linear
combinations of the prior ensemble, and if a reasonably close location and
shape of the fire cannot be found between the linear combinations, the data
assimilation is simply out of luck, and the ensemble cannot approach the data.
From that point on, the ensemble evolves essentially without regard to the
data. This is called filter divergence. So, there is clearly a need to adjust
the simulation state by a position change rather than an additive correction
only. The _morphing EnKF_[28] combines the ideas of data assimilation with
image registration and morphing to provide both additive and position
correction in a natural manner, and can be used to change a model state
reliably in response to data.[14]

The limitations on fire modeling are not entirely computational. At this
level, the models encounter limits in knowledge about the composition of
pyrolysis products and reaction pathways, in addition to gaps in basic
understanding about some aspects of fire behavior such as fire spread in live
fuels and surface-to-crown fire transition.

Thus, while more complex models have value in studying fire behavior and
testing fire spread in a range of scenarios, from the application point of
view, FARSITE and Palm-based applications of BEHAVE have shown great utility
as practical in-the-field tools because of their ability to provide estimates
of fire behavior in real time. While the coupled fire-atmosphere models have
the ability to incorporate the ability of the fire to affect its own local
weather, and model many aspects of the explosive, unsteady nature of fires
that cannot be incorporated in current tools, it remains a challenge to apply
these more complex models in a faster-than-real-time operational environment.
Also, although they have reached a certain degree of realism when simulating
specific natural fires, they must yet address issues such as identifying what
specific, relevant operational information they could provide beyond current
tools, how the simulation time could fit the operational time frame for
decisions (therefore, the simulation must run substantially faster than real
time), what temporal and spatial resolution must be used by the model, and how
they estimate the inherent uncertainty in numerical weather prediction in
their forecast. These operational constraints must be used to steer model
development.

