**Windows Live** is a discontinued brand-name for a set of web services and
software products from Microsoft as part of its software plus services
platform. Chief components under the brand name included web services (all of
which were exposed through corresponding web apps), several computer programs
that interact with the services, and specialized web services for mobile
devices.[2]

According to Microsoft, Windows Live "is a way to extend the Windows user
experience".[3] As such, Windows Vista's welcome screen provides a link to
download Windows Live Messenger or to subscribe to Windows Live OneCare. Also,
Windows Mail, Windows Photo Gallery and Windows Movie Maker were not offered
with Windows 7 and became an exclusive part of Windows Live.[4] Microsoft
announced that Windows 8 would see Windows Live apps included right out-of-
the-box, and would include built-in synchronization technologies powered by
OneDrive (then SkyDrive).[5] The Windows Live brand was phased out during
August 2012, when Microsoft released Windows 8 to manufacturing. Active
Windows Live services remained active but were gradually renamed. The "live"
domain, however, continues to be used in URLs for many online Microsoft sites.

In addition to Windows Live, which is mainly aimed at individuals,[6]
Microsoft brands other properties as "Live", including:

Windows Live was first announced on November 1, 2005. In its initial release,
several Windows Live properties were rebranded and enhanced from Microsoft's
MSN set of products and services. However, MSN still exists alongside Windows
Live as a means of delivering content (as opposed to customized content and
communications).[6] In May 2012 Microsoft began renaming Windows Live
services, partly in anticipation of Windows 8, which integrates many of the
Windows Live products and services into the operating system.[8]

The following services were once part of Windows Live but are still online and
some services still use the "Live" branding in the URL even though the brand
name is dropped.

**My Windows Phone** is a free online companion service for Windows Phone
mobile devices that provides users with a free mobile phone back-up solution
by wirelessly synchronizing contacts, calendar appointments, photos, and
OneNote notebooks with a password-protected online portal. Users can access
and manage their information stored on their Windows Phone devices via the
online portal using their Microsoft account, as well as accessing a set of
features for remotely ringing, locking, mapping, and erasing their lost
phones. This service integrates tightly with other Windows Live services
including People, Calendar, and SkyDrive.[10]

Microsoft released a Windows Live Messenger application on the iOS App Store,
which allows users on mobile devices running the iOS to communicate with their
contacts via the Microsoft Messenger service. In addition to the instant
messaging functionalities, the application also allows users to view their
Messenger social feed, view their friends' Profile's, and integrate with
Hotmail and Photos.

Windows Live also provides customised services specifically created for
feature phones. It is offered via three channels â€” through Client-based (for
Windows Mobile and other supported mobile devices such as Nokia phones), Web-
based (for WAP or GPRS-enabled mobile web browsers), or SMS-based
services.[11]

**Bing** , a replacement of the search engine _Live Search_ , was originally
named **Windows Live Search** (and _MSN Search_ prior to that) and was once
part of the Windows Live family of services. Windows Live Search once occupied
the homepage of Live.com, the domain for all Windows Live services. However,
on March 21, 2007, Microsoft decided to separate its search developments from
its Windows Live services family, forming part of the _Live Search and Ad
Platform_. As part of this reorganization, the new search brand, _Live Search_
, was consolidated with Microsoft adCenter, a part of Microsoft's Platform and
Systems division.[12] However, Microsoft recognised that there was a brand
issue as the word "Live" continued to remain in the brand.[13] As an effort to
create a new identity for Microsoft's search services, on June 3, 2009, Live
Search was officially rebranded as Bing.[14]

**Live Connect** is a collection of APIs and common controls that allow
developers to have a deeper control and offers access to the core Windows Live
services and data through open and easily accessible application programming
interfaces (APIs). Live Connect is built on standard web technologies such as
OAuth 2.0, Representational State Transfer (REST), and JavaScript Object
Notation (JSON), and is designed to work with any technology or device. Live
Connect unites the previously separate APIs of Windows Live into a single API
that is based on industry standards and specifications.

Microsoft has released several computer programs with "Windows Live" brand, a
summary of which is included below. All except Windows Live OneCare are
freeware and published in a software suite called Windows Essentials (formerly
Windows Live Essentials). Essentials programs are designed to integrate well
with each other, within Windows, and with other Windows Live services such as
OneDrive and Outlook.com.[15] Windows Live OneCare on the other hand, was a
commercial consumers utility marketed with a software as a service licensing
model.

The **Windows Live Butterfly** awards program (formerly the **MSN Butterfly**
program) was a program whose members were given the benefit of new Microsoft
software to test before the beta releases went public and they were in direct
contact with the program managers for Windows Live products.

Microsoft had initiated the Windows Live Butterfly program in order to
recognize the contributions made by exemplary beta testers. Prospective
'butterflies' were selected by the Windows Live product team and were
nominated for a term of one year, after which they could be renominated.[18]

The Windows Live Butterfly program was closed in June 2009.

All Windows Live websites sport a common theme. Different themes have been
used on the sites with each phase of product release, called "Waves." Each
Wave has a set of online services and desktop programs (Windows Essentials).
The web services are labelled by each Wave, for example, Hotmail Wave 4. The
programs from Windows Essentials are usually called by a year number, for
example, Windows Live Messenger 2011\.

Most original Windows Live applications and services used a visual theme known
as _Blue Vapor_ or _Flair_. This theme no longer exists on any of the current
Windows Live properties.

With the public beta release of the _Windows Live Wave 2 Suite_[19] ("Wave"
refers to the group or wave of products to be released), a new visual theme
was released to enable the Aero transparency effect in Windows Vista.[20] This
theme no longer exists on any of the current Windows Live properties.

Microsoft released a set of new themes for their Windows Live Wave 3 services,
which allows users to customize their pages on Windows Live using a set of
pre-selected background pictures. Several of these themes are dynamic and
change according to the time of day and the current weather condition of the
user.[21] This theme remains in use on sites such as Windows Live Admin
Center.

In addition to the themes provided in Windows Live Wave 3, the release of
Windows Live Wave 4 provided additional themes for users to customise their
pages on Windows Live, with several dynamic themes that changes according to
the time of day and weather conditions at the user's location. Several of
these newly added themes are similar to wallpapers originating from Windows
7.[22] In addition, the Windows Live Wave 4 header features a reorganised
dynamic navigation menu that displays the number of the user's current online
contacts and the number of unread e-mails,[23] as well as an in-built Windows
Live Web Messenger service allowing users to connect to the Microsoft
Messenger service and Facebook chat service to chat with their online contacts
while browsing any Windows Live properties using a web browser.[24] This theme
remains in use on sites such as Family Safety.

All Windows Live apps for Windows 8 are designed with a Metro-style user
interface.[25] All web services also feature a new Metro-style user interface
and stop using "Windows Live" in their names. The UI's header contains a pull-
down element with allow users to easily switch to Outlook.com, People,
Calendar, and OneDrive. The header's color also changes depending on the web
service the user is using, with the exception of Outlook.com which allow users
to customize the header's color according to their preference. The new
interface also has an in-built Messaging sidebar that allow users to view
presence of, instant message, audio call and video call their contacts on
Messenger, Facebook chat, as well as Skype.

In February 2014, Wave 5 services and Office Web Apps were consolidated and
rebranded as Office Online.[26]

The Windows Live services are renamed as listed:[16]

