The **Young Artist Award** (originally known as the **Youth in Film Award** )
is an accolade presented by the Young Artist Association, a non-profit
organization founded in 1978 to honor excellence of youth performers, and to
provide scholarships for young artists who may be physically disabled or
financially unstable.[1][2][3][4]

First presented in 1979, the Young Artist Awards was the first organization
established to specifically recognize and award the contributions of
performers under the age of 21 in the fields of film, television, theater and
music.[1][5][6]

The 1st Youth In Film Awards ceremony was held in October 1979, at the
Sheraton Universal Hotel in Hollywood to honor outstanding young performers of
the 1978/1979 season.[7][8][9] The 38th Annual Young Artist Awards ceremony,
honoring young performers of 2016, was held at the Alex Theatre in Los
Angeles, California on March 17, 2017.[10]

The **Young Artist Association** (originally known as the **Hollywood Women's
Photo and Press Club** , and later, the **Youth in Film Association** ) is a
non-profit organization founded in 1978 to recognize and award excellence of
youth performers, and to provide scholarships for young artists who may be
physically and/or financially challenged.[1][2][3][4] The Young Artist
Association was the first organization to establish an awards ceremony
specifically set to recognize and award the contributions of performers under
the age of 21 in the fields of film, television, theater and music.[1][5][6]

The **Young Artist Foundation** is a non-profit 501(c) organization founded in
1978 by long-standing Hollywood Foreign Press (Golden Globes) member Maureen
Dragone and dedicated to presenting scholarships to physically and/or
financially challenged aspiring young artists, allowing them to pursue a
career in entertainment by attending a performing arts school of their
choice.[1][3][4] The scholarship program is funded exclusively by donations
including contribution from the Hollywood Foreign Press Association.[3][11]

The Young Artist Awards are presented annually by the Young Artist
Association. Originally known as the Youth In Film Awards for the first twenty
years,[9][12][13] the name was officially changed to the Young Artist Awards
for the 21st annual awards ceremony in March 2000.[1][13][14] Playfully
referred to as the "Kiddie Oscars", the Young Artist Awards are regarded as
young Hollywood's answer to the Academy Awards, recognizing children for their
work within the entertainment industry.[15][16][17][18][19][20]

First presented for the 1978â€“1979 entertainment season, the awards were
envisioned by Maureen Dragone, as a way to honor talented young people in
film, television and music who might otherwise be eclipsed by their adult co-
stars.[1][3][5] Two notable examples that year being young Ricky Schroder in
_The Champ_ and Justin Henry in _Kramer vs. Kramer_ , who were each nominated
for Golden Globes in the same categories as their adult counterparts.[5][15]
Originally held in the autumn in its early years, the awards ceremony has
traditionally taken place in the spring for more than 20 years.[9][21][22][23]

The original Youth In Film Award was a statuette was similar to a miniature
Oscar.[15][24] A gilded figure of a man holding a laurel wreath instead of a
sword and standing upon a relatively large "trophy" style base.[24] The
current Young Artist Award statuette, is a figure displaying a Five-pointed
star above its head and standing upon a smaller base.[25][26] In addition to
the Young Artist Award statuette presented to the winners, all nominees are
presented with a special nomination plaque at the ceremony, commemorating
their nominations in their respective categories.[27]

Candidates considered for nomination must be between the ages of 5 and 21 and
are usually submitted for consideration by producers or by the young artist's
agent and/or manager.[6][21] Submissions are traditionally due by the end of
January to mid-February and nominees are announced about one month later at an
annual nomination ceremony and party.[6][21] Originally conceived of as a way
to acknowledge young artists under the age of 21, the focus of the awards has
shifted over time to focus primarily on young artists who were under the age
of 18 at the time of principal production of the project for which they are
nominated.[5][8][15]

Winners are selected by members of the Young Artist Association.[23]
Originally known as the Hollywood Women's Photo and Press Club, and later, the
Youth in Film Association, the general membership was originally composed of
88 journalists and photographers, who were active in various branches of the
arts.[8][9][28] Today, the Young Artist Association has a voting board of over
125 members composed of journalists, agents, and former child performers.[15]
Winners are selected by secret ballot of all associated with the Young Artist
Association as well as former nominees.[23]

The various Young Artist Awards categories have evolved extensively since the
first awards were presented. Originally beginning with only 11 competitive
categories in 1979, the first categories included "Best Juvenile Actor and
Actress in a Motion Picture", "Best Juvenile Actor and Actress in a TV Series
or Special", "Best Juvenile Actor and Actress in a Daytime TV Series", and
"Best Male and Female Juvenile Recording Artist", as well as competitive
categories honoring studios and networks for "family friendly" films and
television programming.[5]

Over time, the competitive categories have been expanded to include "Best
Young Actor and Actress in an International Feature Film", "Best Young Actor
and Actress in a Short Film", "Best Young Supporting Actor and Actress in
Film", "Best Young Ensemble Cast", "Best Young Recurring Actor and Actress in
a TV Series", and "Best Young Guest-starring Actor and Actress in a TV
Series", with many of the categories being split to acknowledge young artists
age 10 and under in their own separate categories.[29] In addition to its
well-known film and television awards, the association has also recognized the
achievements of youth in other fields of the performing arts over the years,
including theater, dance, commercials, journalism, radio and stand-up
comedy.[12][30][31]

While many of the acting categories have been expanded over time, some early
competitive categories such as "Best Juvenile Recording Artist", "Best Family
Motion Picture" and "Best Family TV Series" have been phased out over the
years, with accolades for those achievements now being bestowed in the form of
special "Honorary" awards.[29]

The foundation's most notable annual honorary awards include the "Jackie
Coogan Award", often presented to film studios, producers or directors for
their "Outstanding Contribution To Youth Through Entertainment", and the
"Former Child Star Award", presented as the foundation's "Lifetime Achievement
Award" honoring former child stars for their achievements.[32][33]

The ceremony is held annually in Hollywood and has traditionally been
considered one of the more formal children's awards ceremonies, with honorees
and their chaperones "dressing-up" for the occasion, and arriving in
limousines.[15][16][34][35] All members of the press are invited to attend the
pre-show red carpet arrivals as young celebrity attendees make their entrances
and sign autographs, and each year's presenters are often selected from the
previous year's young winners or from that year's list of
nominees.[15][16][19][27] After the ceremony is the annual banquet dinner and
then dancing with live musical entertainment often provided by talented young
musical artists of the day.[15][16][17][26]

The first Youth In Film Awards were presented in October 1979 at a banquet
ceremony held at the Sheraton Universal Hotel in Hollywood,
California.[7][8][9] Subsequent venues over the years have included the
Ambassador Hotel's Coconut Grove, the Globe Theater, the Beverly Garland Hotel
and the Sportsmen's Lodge.[23][29][36]

